!

Introduction: A Guide to the Guide 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy 
The Restaurant at the End of the Universe 
Life, the Universe and Everything 
So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish 
Young Zaphod Plays It Safe 
Mostly Harmless 
Footnotes 
Introduction: A GUIDE TO 
THE GUIDE
Some unhelpful remarks from the author 
The history of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is now so 
complicated that every time I tell it I contradict myself, and whenever 
I do get it right I'm misquoted. So the publication of this omnibus 
edition seemed like a good opportunity to set the record straight ʹ or 
at least firmly crooked. Anything that is put down wrong here is, as far 
as I'm concerned, wrong for good. 
The idea for the title first cropped up while I was lying drunk in a 
field in Innsbruck, Austria, in 1971. Not particularly drunk, just the 
sort of drunk you get when you have a couple of stiff Gössers after 
not having eaten for two days straight, on account of being a 
penniless hitchhiker. We are talking of a mild inability to stand up. 
I was traveling with a copy of the Hitch Hiker s Guide to Europe by 
Ken Walsh, a very battered copy that I had borrowed from someone. 
In fact, since this was 1971 and I still have the book, it must count as 
stolen by now. I didn't have a copy of Europe on Five Dollars a Day (as 
it then was) because I wasn't in that financial league. 
Night was beginning to fall on my field as it spun lazily underneath 
me. I was wondering where I could go that was cheaper than 
Innsbruck, revolved less and didn't do the sort of things to me that 
Innsbruck had done to me that afternoon. What had happened was 
this. I had been walking through the town trying to find a particular 
address, and being thoroughly lost I stopped to ask for directions 
from a man in the street. I knew this mightn't be easy because I don't 
speak German, but I was still surprised to discover just how much 
difficulty I was having communicating with this particular man. 
Gradually the truth dawned on me as we struggled in vain to 
understand each other that of all the people in Innsbruck I could have 
stopped to ask, the one I had picked did not speak English, did not 
speak French and was also deaf and dumb. With a series of sincerely 
apologetic hand movements, I disentangled myself, and a few 
minutes later, on another street, I stopped and asked another man 
who also turned out to be deaf and dumb, which was when I bought 
the beers. 
I ventured back onto the street. I tried again. 
When the third man I spoke to turned out to be deaf and dumb 
and also blind I began to feel a terrible weight settling on my 
shoulders; wherever I looked the trees and buildings took on dark and 
menacing aspects. I pulled my coat tightly around me and hurried 
lurching down the street, whipped by a sudden gusting wind. I 
bumped into someone and stammered an apology, but he was deaf 
and dumb and unable to understand me. The sky loured. The 
pavement seemed to tip and spin. If I hadn't happened then to duck 
down a side street and pass a hotel where a convention for the deaf 
was being held, there is every chance that my mind would have 
cracked completely and I would have spent the rest of my life writing 
the sort of books for which Kafka became famous and dribbling. 
As it is I went to lie in a field, along with my Hitch Hiker's Guide to 
Europe, and when the stars came out it occurred to me that if only
someone would write a Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy as well, then 
I for one would be off like a shot. Having had this thought I promptly 
fell asleep and forgot about it for six years. 
I went to Cambridge University. I took a number of bathsʹand a 
degree in English. I worried a lot about girls and what had happened 
to my bike. Later I became a writer and worked on a lot of things that 
were almost incredibly successful but in fact just failed to see the light 
of day. Other writers will know what I mean. 
My pet project was to write something that would combine 
comedy and science fiction, and it was this obsession that drove me 
into deep debt and despair. No one was interested, except finally one 
man a BBC radio producer named Simon Brett who had had the same 
idea, comedy and science fiction. Although Simon only produced the 
first episode before leaving the BBC to concentrate on his own writing 
(he is best known in the United Stares for his excellent Charles Paris 
detective novels), I owe him an immense debt of gratitude for simply 
getting the thing to happen in the first place. He was succeeded by 
the legendary Geoffrey Perkins. 
In its original form the show was going to be rather different. I was 
feeling a little disgruntled with the world at the time and had put 
together about six different plots, each of which ended with the 
destruction of the world in a different way, and for a different reason. 
It was to be called "The Ends of the Earth " 
While I was filling in the details of the first plot ʹ in which the Earth 
was demolished to make way for a new hyperspace express route ʹ I 
realized that I needed to have someone from another planet around 
to tell the reader what was going on, to give the story the context it 
needed. So I had to work out who he was and what he was doing on 
the Earth. 
I decided to call him Ford Prefect. (This was a joke that missed 
American audiences entirely, of course, since they had never heard of 
the rather oddly named little car, and many thought it was a typing 
error for Perfect.) I explained in the text that the minimal research my 
alien character had done before arriving on this planet had led him to 
think that this name would be "nicely inconspicuous." He had simply 
mistaken the dominant life form. 
So how would such a mistake arise? I remembered when I used to 
hitchhike through Europe and would often find that the information 
or advice that came my way was out of date or misleading in some 
way. Most of it, of course, just came from stories of other people's 
travel experiences. 
At that point the title The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy 
suddenly popped back into my mind from wherever it had been 
hiding all this time. Ford, I decided, would be a researcher who 
collected data for the Guide. As soon as I started to develop this 
particular notion, it moved inexorably to the center of the story, and 
the rest, as the creator of the original Ford Prefect would say, is bunk. 
The story grew in the most convoluted way, as many people will be 
surprised to learn. Writing episodically meant that when I finished 
one episode I had no idea about what the next one would contain. 
When, in the twists and turns of the plot, some event suddenly 
seemed to illuminate things that had gone before, I was as surprised 
as anyone else. 
I think that the BBC's attitude toward the show while it was in 
production was very similar to that which Macbeth had toward 
murdering people ʹ initial doubts, followed by cautious enthusiasm 
and then greater and greater alarm at the sheer scale of the 
undertaking and still no end in sight. Reports that Geoffrey and I and 
the sound engineers were buried in a subterranean studio for weeks 
on end, taking as long to produce a single sound effect as other 
people took to produce an entire series (and stealing everybody else's 
studio time in which to do so), were all vigorously denied but 
absolutely true. 
The budget of the series escalated to the point that it could have 
practically paid for a few seconds of Dallas. If the show hadn't 
worked... 
The first episode went out on BBC Radio 4 at 10 30 P.M. on 
Wednesday, March 8, 1978, in a huge blaze of no publicity at all. Bats 
heard it. The odd dog barked. 
After a couple of weeks a letter or two trickled in. So ʹ someone 
out there had listened. People I Balked to seemed to like Marvin the 
Paranoid Android, whom I had written in as a one ʹ scene joke and 
had only developed further at Geoffrey's insistence. 
Then some publishers became interested, and I was commissioned 
by Pan Books in England to write up the series in book form. After a 
lot of procrastination and hiding and inventing excuses and having 
baths, I managed to get about two`thirds of it done. At this point they 
said, very pleasantly and politely, that I had already passed ten 
deadlines, so would I please just finish the page I was on and let them 
have the damn thing. 
Meanwhile, I was busy trying to write another series and was also 
writing and script editing the TV series "Dr. Who," because while it 
was all very pleasant to have your own radio series, especially one 
that somebody had written in to say they had heard, it didn't exactly 
buy you lunch. 
So that was more or less the situation when the book The 
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy was published in England in 
September 1979 and appeared on the Sunday Times mass market 
best`seller list at number one and just stayed there. Clearly, 
somebody had been listening. 
This is where things start getting complicated, and this is what I 
was asked, in writing this Introduction, to explain. The Guide has 
appeared in so many forms ʹ books, radio, a television series, records 
and soon to be a major motion picture ʹ each time with a different 
story line that even its most acute followers have become baffled at 
times. 
Here then is a breakdown of the different versions ʹ not including 
the various stage versions, which haven't been seen in the States and 
only complicate the matter further. 
The radio series began in England in March 1978. The first series 
consisted of six programs, or "fits" as they were called. Fits 1 thru 6. 
Easy. Later that year, one more episode was recorded and broadcast, 
commonly known as the Christmas episode. It contained no reference 
of any kind to Christmas. It was called the Christmas episode because 
it was first broadcast on December 24, which is not Christmas Day. 
After this, things began to get increasingly complicated. 
In the fall of 1979, the first Hitchhiker book was published in 
England, called The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It was a 
substantially expanded version of the first four episodes of the radio
series, in which some of the characters behaved in entirely different 
ways and others behaved in exactly the same ways but for entirely 
different reasons, which amounts to the same thing but saves 
rewriting the dialogue. 
At roughly the same time a double record album was released, 
which was, by contrast, a slightly contracted version of the first four 
episodes of the radio series. These were not the recordings that were 
originally broadcast but wholly new recordings of substantially the 
same scripts. This was done because we had used music off 
gramophone records as incidental music for the series, which is fine 
on radio, but makes commercial release impossible. 
In January 1980, five new episodes of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to 
the Galaxy" were broadcast on BBC Radio, all in one week, bringing 
the total number to twelve episodes. 
In the fall of 1980, the second Hitchhiker book was published in 
England, around the same time that Harmony Books published the 
first book in the United States. It was a very substantially reworked, 
reedited and contracted version of episodes 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, S and 6 
(in that order) of the radio series "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the 
Galaxy." In case that seemed too straightforward, the book was called 
The Restaurant at the End of the Universe, because it included the 
material from radio episodes of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the 
Galaxy," which was set in a restaurant called Milliways, otherwise 
known as the Restaurant at the End of the Universe. 
At roughly the same time, a second record album was made 
featuring a heavily rewritten and expanded version of episodes 5 and 
6 of the radio series. This record album was also called The Restaurant 
at the End of the Universe. 
Meanwhile, a series of six television episodes of "The Hitchhiker's 
Guide to the Galaxy" was made by the BBC and broadcast in January 
1981. This was based, more or less, on the first six episodes of the 
radio series. In other words, it incorporated most of the book The 
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and the second half of the book The 
Restaurant at be End of the Universe. Therefore, though it followed 
the basic structure of the radio series, it incorporated revisions from 
the books, which didn't. 
In January 1982 Harmony Books published The Restaurant at the 
End of the Universe in the United States. 
In the summer of 1982, a third Hitchhiker book was published 
simultaneously in England and the United States, called Life, the 
Universe and Everything. This was not based on anything that had 
already been heard or seen on radio or television. In fact it flatly 
contradicted episodes 7, 8, 9, 10, I 1 and 12 of the radio series. These 
episodes of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy," you will 
remember, had already been incorporated in revised form in the book 
called The Restaurant at the End of the Universe. 
At this point I went to America to write a film screenplay which was 
completely inconsistent with most of what has gone on so far, and 
since that film was then delayed in the making (a rumor currently has 
it that filming will start shortly before the Last Trump), I wrote a 
fourth and last book in the trilogy, So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish. 
This was published in Britain and the USA in the fall of 1984 and it 
effectively contradicted everything to date, up to and including itself. 
As if this all were not enough I wrote a computer game for Infocom 
called The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, which bore only fleeting 
resemblances to anything that had previously gone under that title, 
and in collaboration with Geoffrey Perkins assembled The Hitchhiker s 
Guide to the Galaxy: The Original Radio Scripts (published in England 
and the USA in 1985). Now this was an interesting venture. The book 
is, as the title suggests, a collection of all the radio scripts, as 
broadcast, and it is therefore the only example of one Hitchhiker 
publication accurately and consistently reflecting another. I feel a 
little uncomfortable with this ʹ which is why the introduction to that 
book was written after the final and definitive one you are now 
reading and, of course, flatly contradicts it. 
People often ask me how they can leave the planet, so I have 
prepared some brief notes. 
How to Leave the Planet 
I. Phone NASA. Their phone number is (713) 483`3111. Explain that 
it's very important that you get away as soon as possible. 
2. If they do not cooperate, phone any friend you may have in the 
White House` 202) 456`1414`to have a word on your behalf with the 
guys at NASA. 
3. If you don't have any friends in the White House, phone the 
Kremlin (ask the overseas operator for 0107`095`295`9051). They 
don't have any friends there either (at least, none to speak of), but 
they do seem to have a little influence, so you may as well try. 
4. If that also fails, phone the Pope for guidance. His telephone 
number is 011`39`6`6982, and I gather his switchboard is infallible. 
5. If all these attempts fail, flag down a passing flying saucer and 
explain that de's vitally important you get away before your phone bill 
arrives. 
Douglas Adams 
Los Angeles 1983 and 
London 1985/1986 
DOUGLAS ADAMS 
THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO 
THE GALAXY
For Jonny Brock and Clare Gorst
and all other Arlingtonians
for tea, sympathy, and a sofa 
Preface
Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of 
the western spiral arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow 
sun. 
Orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety`two million miles is an 
utterly insignificant little blue green planet whose ape`descended life 
forms are so amazingly primitive that they still think digital watches 
are a pretty neat idea. 
This planet has ʹ or rather had ʹ a problem, which was this: most 
of the people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time. Many 
solutions were suggested for this problem, but most of these were 
largely concerned with the movements of small green pieces of paper, 
which is odd because on the whole it wasn't the small green pieces of 
paper that were unhappy. 
And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and 
most of them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches. 
Many were increasingly of the opinion that they'd all made a big 
mistake in coming down from the trees in the first place. And some 
said that even the trees had been a bad move, and that no one should 
ever have left the oceans. 
And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man 
had been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice 
to people for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in 
Rickmansworth suddenly realized what it was that had been going 
wrong all this time, and she finally knew how the world could be 
made a good and happy place. This time it was right, it would work, 
and no one would have to get nailed to anything. 
Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone 
about it, a terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost 
forever. 
This is not her story. 
But it is the story of that terrible stupid catastrophe and some of its 
consequences. 
It is also the story of a book, a book called The Hitch Hiker's Guide 
to the Galaxy ʹ not an Earth book, never published on Earth, and until 
the terrible catastrophe occurred, never seen or heard of by any 
Earthman. 
Nevertheless, a wholly remarkable book. 
In fact it was probably the most remarkable book ever to come out 
of the great publishing houses of Ursa Minor ʹ of which no Earthman 
had ever heard either. 
Not only is it a wholly remarkable book, it is also a highly successful 
one ʹ more popular than the Celestial Home Care Omnibus, better 
selling than Fifty More Things to do in Zero Gravity, and more 
controversial than Oolon Colluphid's trilogy of philosophical 
blockbusters Where God Went Wrong, Some More of God's Greatest 
Mistakes and Who is this God Person Anyway? 
In many of the more relaxed civilizations on the Outer Eastern Rim 
of the Galaxy, the Hitch Hiker's Guide has already supplanted the 
great Encyclopedia Galactica as the standard repository of all 
knowledge and wisdom, for though it has many omissions and 
contains much that is apocryphal, or at least wildly inaccurate, it 
scores over the older, more pedestrian work in two important 
respects. 
First, it is slightly cheaper; and secondly it has the words DON'T 
PANIC inscribed in large friendly letters on its cover. 
But the story of this terrible, stupid Thursday, the story of its 
extraordinary consequences, and the story of how these 
consequences are inextricably intertwined with this remarkable book 
begins very simply. 
It begins with a house. 
Chapter 1
The house stood on a slight rise just on the edge of the village. It 
stood on its own and looked over a broad spread of West Country 
farmland. Not a remarkable house by any means ʹ it was about thirty 
years old, squattish, squarish, made of brick, and had four windows 
set in the front of a size and proportion which more or less exactly 
failed to please the eye. 
The only person for whom the house was in any way special was 
Arthur Dent, and that was only because it happened to be the one he 
lived in. He had lived in it for about three years, ever since he had 
moved out of London because it made him nervous and irritable. He 
was about thirty as well, dark haired and never quite at ease with 
himself. The thing that used to worry him most was the fact that 
people always used to ask him what he was looking so worried about. 
He worked in local radio which he always used to tell his friends was a 
lot more interesting than they probably thought. It was, too ʹ most of 
his friends worked in advertising. 
It hadn't properly registered with Arthur that the council wanted to 
knock down his house and build an bypass instead. 
At eight o'clock on Thursday morning Arthur didn't feel very good. 
He woke up blearily, got up, wandered blearily round his room, 
opened a window, saw a bulldozer, found his slippers, and stomped 
off to the bathroom to wash. 
Toothpaste on the brush ʹ so. Scrub. 
Shaving mirror ʹ pointing at the ceiling. He adjusted it. For a 
moment it reflected a second bulldozer through the bathroom 
window. Properly adjusted, it reflected Arthur Dent's bristles. He 
shaved them off, washed, dried, and stomped off to the kitchen to 
find something pleasant to put in his mouth. 
Kettle, plug, fridge, milk, coffee. Yawn. 
The word bulldozer wandered through his mind for a moment in 
search of something to connect with. 
The bulldozer outside the kitchen window was quite a big one. 
He stared at it. 
"Yellow," he thought and stomped off back to his bedroom to get 
dressed. 
Passing the bathroom he stopped to drink a large glass of water, 
and another. He began to suspect that he was hung over. Why was he 
hung over? Had he been drinking the night before? He supposed that 
he must have been. He caught a glint in the shaving mirror. "Yellow," 
he thought and stomped on to the bedroom. 
He stood and thought. The pub, he thought. Oh dear, the pub. He 
vaguely remembered being angry, angry about something that 
seemed important. He'd been telling people about it, telling people 
about it at great length, he rather suspected: his clearest visual 
recollection was of glazed looks on other people's faces. Something 
about a new bypass he had just found out about. It had been in the 
pipeline for months only no one seemed to have known about it. 
Ridiculous. He took a swig of water. It would sort itself out, he'd 
decided, no one wanted a bypass, the council didn't have a leg to 
stand on. It would sort itself out. 
God what a terrible hangover it had earned him though. He looked 
at himself in the wardrobe mirror. He stuck out his tongue. "Yellow," 
he thought. The word yellow wandered through his mind in search of 
something to connect with. 
Fifteen seconds later he was out of the house and lying in front of a 
big yellow bulldozer that was advancing up his garden path. 
Mr. L Prosser was, as they say, only human. In other words he was 
a carbon`based life form descended from an ape. More specifically he 
was forty, fat and shabby and worked for the local council. Curiously 
enough, though he didn't know it, he was also a direct male`line 
descendant of Genghis Khan, though intervening generations and 
racial mixing had so juggled his genes that he had no discernible 
Mongoloid characteristics, and the only vestiges left in Mr. L Prosser 
of his mighty ancestry were a pronounced stoutness about the tum 
and a predilection for little fur hats. 
He was by no means a great warrior: in fact he was a nervous 
worried man. Today he was particularly nervous and worried because 
something had gone seriously wrong with his job ʹ which was to see 
that Arthur Dent's house got cleared out of the way before the day 
was out. 
"Come off it, Mr. Dent,", he said, "you can't win you know. You 
can't lie in front of the bulldozer indefinitely." He tried to make his 
eyes blaze fiercely but they just wouldn't do it. 
Arthur lay in the mud and squelched at him. 
"I'm game," he said, "we'll see who rusts first." 
"I'm afraid you're going to have to accept it," said Mr. Prosser 
gripping his fur hat and rolling it round the top of his head, "this 
bypass has got to be built and it's going to be built " 
"First I've heard of it," said Arthur, "why's it going to be built?" 
Mr. Prosser shook his finger at him for a bit, then stopped and put 
it away again. 
"What do you mean, why's it got to be built?" he said. "It's a bypass. 
You've got to build bypasses." 
Bypasses are devices which allow some people to drive from point
A to point B very fast whilst other people dash from point B to point A 
very fast. People living at point C, being a point directly in between, 
are often given to wonder what's so great about point A that so many 
people of point B are so keen to get there, and what's so great about 
point B that so many people of point A are so keen to get there. They 
often wish that people would just once and for all work out where the 
hell they wanted to be. 
Mr. Prosser wanted to be at point D. Point D wasn't anywhere in
particular, it was just any convenient point a very long way from 
points A, B and C. He would have a nice little cottage at point D, with 
axes over the door, and spend a pleasant amount of time at point E, 
which would be the nearest pub to point D. His wife of course wanted 
climbing roses, but he wanted axes. He didn't know why ʹ he just 
liked axes. He flushed hotly under the derisive grins of the bulldozer 
drivers. 
He shifted his weight from foot to foot, but it was equally 
uncomfortable on each. Obviously somebody had been appallingly 
incompetent and he hoped to God it wasn't him. 
Mr. Prosser said: "You were quite entitled to make any suggestions 
or protests at the appropriate time you know." 
"Appropriate time?" hooted Arthur. "Appropriate time? The first I 
knew about it was when a workman arrived at my home yesterday. I 
asked him if he'd come to clean the windows and he said no he'd 
come to demolish the house. He didn't tell me straight away of course. 
Oh no. First he wiped a couple of windows and charged me a fiver. 
Then he told me." 
"But Mr. Dent, the plans have been available in the local planning 
office for the last nine month." 
"Oh yes, well as soon as I heard I went straight round to see them, 
yesterday afternoon. You hadn't exactly gone out of your way to call 
attention to them had you? I mean like actually telling anybody or 
anything." 
"But the plans were on display..." 
"On display? I eventually had to go down to the cellar to find 
them." 
"That's the display department." 
"With a torch." 
"Ah, well the lights had probably gone." 
"So had the stairs." 
"But look, you found the notice didn't you?" 
"Yes," said Arthur, "yes I did. It was on display in the bottom of a 
locked filing cabinet stuck in a disused lavatory with a sign on the 
door saying Beware of the Leopard." 
A cloud passed overhead. It cast a shadow over Arthur Dent as he 
lay propped up on his elbow in the cold mud. It cast a shadow over 
Arthur Dent's house. Mr. Prosser frowned at it. 
"It's not as if it's a particularly nice house," he said. 
"I'm sorry, but I happen to like it." 
"You'll like the bypass." 
"Oh shut up," said Arthur Dent. "Shut up and go away, and take 
your bloody bypass with you. You haven't got a leg to stand on and 
you know it." 
Mr. Prosser's mouth opened and closed a couple of times while his 
mind was for a moment filled with inexplicable but terribly attractive 
visions of Arthur Dent's house being consumed with fire and Arthur 
himself running screaming from the blazing ruin with at least three 
hefty spears protruding from his back. Mr. Prosser was often 
bothered with visions like these and they made him feel very nervous. 
He stuttered for a moment and then pulled himself together. 
"Mr. Dent," he said. 
"Hello? Yes?" said Arthur. 
"Some factual information for you. Have you any idea how much 
damage that bulldozer would suffer if I just let it roll straight over 
you?" 
"How much?" said Arthur. 
"None at all," said Mr. Prosser, and stormed nervously off 
wondering why his brain was filled with a thousand hairy horsemen 
all shouting at him. 
By a curious coincidence, None at all is exactly how much suspicion 
the ape`descendant Arthur Dent had that one of his closest friends 
was not descended from an ape, but was in fact from a small planet in 
the vicinity of Betelgeuse and not from Guildford as he usually 
claimed. 
Arthur Dent had never, ever suspected this. 
This friend of his had first arrived on the planet some fifteen Earth 
years previously, and he had worked hard to blend himself into Earth 
society ʹ with, it must be said, some success. For instance he had 
spent those fifteen years pretending to be an out of work actor, which 
was plausible enough. 
He had made one careless blunder though, because he had 
skimped a bit on his preparatory research. The information he had 
gathered had led him to choose the name "Ford Prefect" as being 
nicely inconspicuous. 
He was not conspicuously tall, his features were striking but not 
conspicuously handsome. His hair was wiry and gingerish and brushed 
backwards from the temples. His skin seemed to be pulled backwards 
from the nose. There was something very slightly odd about him, but 
it was difficult to say what it was. Perhaps it was that his eyes didn't 
blink often enough and when you talked to him for any length of time 
your eyes began involuntarily to water on his behalf. Perhaps it was 
that he smiled slightly too broadly and gave people the unnerving 
impression that he was about to go for their neck. 
He struck most of the friends he had made on Earth as an eccentric, 
but a harmless one ʹ an unruly boozer with some oddish habits. For 
instance he would often gatecrash university parties, get badly drunk 
and start making fun of any astrophysicist he could find till he got 
thrown out. 
Sometimes he would get seized with oddly distracted moods and 
stare into the sky as if hypnotized until someone asked him what he 
was doing. Then he would start guiltily for a moment, relax and grin. 
"Oh, just looking for flying saucers," he would joke and everyone 
would laugh and ask him what sort of flying saucers he was looking 
for. 
"Green ones " he would reply with a wicked grin, laugh wildly for a 
moment and then suddenly lunge for the nearest bar and buy an 
enormous round of drinks. 
Evenings like this usually ended badly. Ford would get out of his 
skull on whisky, huddle into a corner with some girl and explain to her 
in slurred phrases that honestly the colour of the flying saucers didn't 
matter that much really. 
Thereafter, staggering semi`paralytic down the night streets he 
would often ask passing policemen if they knew the way to 
Betelgeuse. The policemen would usually say something like, "Don't 
you think it's about time you went off home sir?" 
"I'm trying to baby, I'm trying to," is what Ford invariably replied on 
these occasions. 
In fact what he was really looking out for when he stared 
distractedly into the night sky was any kind of flying saucer at all. The 
reason he said green was that green was the traditional space livery 
of the Betelgeuse trading scouts. 
Ford Prefect was desperate that any flying saucer at all would 
arrive soon because fifteen years was a long time to get stranded 
anywhere, particularly somewhere as mindboggingly dull as the Earth. 
Ford wished that a flying saucer would arrive soon because he 
knew how to flag flying saucers down and get lifts from them. He 
knew how to see the Marvels of the Universe for less than thirty 
Altairan dollars a day. 
In fact, Ford Prefect was a roving researcher for that wholly
remarkable book The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. 
Human beings are great adaptors, and by lunchtime life in the 
environs of Arthur's house had settled into a steady routine. It was 
Arthur's accepted role to lie squelching in the mud making occasional 
demands to see his lawyer, his mother or a good book; it was Mr. 
Prosser's accepted role to tackle Arthur with the occasional new ploy 
such as the For the Public Good talk, the March of Progress talk, the 
They Knocked My House Down Once You Know, Never Looked Back 
talk and various other cajoleries and threats; and it was the bulldozer 
drivers' accepted role to sit around drinking coffee and experimenting 
with union regulations to see how they could turn the situation to 
their financial advantage. 
The Earth moved slowly in its diurnal course. 
The sun was beginning to dry out the mud Arthur lay in. 
A shadow moved across him again. 
"Hello Arthur," said the shadow. 
Arthur looked up and squinting into the sun was startled to see 
Ford Prefect standing above him. 
"Ford  Hello, how are you?" 
"Fine," said Ford, "look, are you busy?" 
"Am I busy?" exclaimed Arthur. "Well, I've just got all these 
bulldozers and things to lie in front of because they'll knock my house 
down if I don't, but other than that... well, no not especially, why?" 
They don't have sarcasm on Betelgeuse, and Ford Prefect often 
failed to notice it unless he was concentrating. He said, "Good, is 
there anywhere we can talk?" 
"What?" said Arthur Dent. 
For a few seconds Ford seemed to ignore him, and stared fixedly 
into the sky like a rabbit trying to get run over by a car. Then suddenly 
he squatted down beside Arthur. 
"We've got to talk," he said urgently. 
"Fine," said Arthur, "talk." 
"And drink," said Ford. "It's vitally important that we talk and drink. 
Now. We'll go to the pub in the village." 
He looked into the sky again, nervous, expectant. 
"Look, don't you understand?" shouted Arthur. He pointed at 
Prosser. "That man wants to knock my house down " 
Ford glanced at him, puzzled. 
"Well he can do it while you're away can't he?" he asked. 
"But I don't want him to " 
"Ah." 
"Look, what's the matter with you Ford?" said Arthur. 
"Nothing. Nothing's the matter. Listen to me ʹ I've got to tell you 
the most important thing you've ever heard. I've got to tell you now, 
and I've got to tell you in the saloon bar of the Horse and Groom." 
"But why?" 
"Because you are going to need a very stiff drink." 
Ford stared at Arthur, and Arthur was astonished to find that his 
will was beginning to weaken. He didn't realize that this was because 
of an old drinking game that Ford learned to play in the hyperspace 
ports that served the madranite mining belts in the star system of 
Orion Beta. 
The game was not unlike the Earth game called Indian Wrestling, 
and was played like this: 
Two contestants would sit either side of a table, with a glass in 
front of each of them. 
Between them would be placed a bottle of Janx Spirit (as 
immortalized in that ancient Orion mining song "Oh don't give me 
none more of that Old Janx Spirit/ No, don't you give me none more 
of that Old Janx Spirit/ For my head will fly, my tongue will lie, my 
eyes will fry and I may die/ Won't you pour me one more of that sinful 
Old Janx Spirit"). 
Each of the two contestants would then concentrate their will on 
the bottle and attempt to tip it and pour spirit into the glass of his 
opponent ʹ who would then have to drink it. 
The bottle would then be refilled. The game would be played again. 
And again. 
Once you started to lose you would probably keep losing, because 
one of the effects of Janx spirit is to depress telepsychic power. 
As soon as a predetermined quantity had been consumed, the final 
loser would have to perform a forfeit, which was usually obscenely 
biological. 
Ford Prefect usually played to lose. 
Ford stared at Arthur, who began to think that perhaps he did want 
to go to the Horse and Groom after all. 
"But what about my house...?" he asked plaintively. 
Ford looked across to Mr. Prosser, and suddenly a wicked thought 
struck him. 
"He wants to knock your house down?" 
"Yes, he wants to build..." 
"And he can't because you're lying in front of the bulldozers?" 
"Yes, and..." 
"I'm sure we can come to some arrangement," said Ford. "Excuse 
me " he shouted. 
Mr. Prosser (who was arguing with a spokesman for the bulldozer 
drivers about whether or not Arthur Dent constituted a mental health 
hazard, and how much they should get paid if he did) looked around. 
He was surprised and slightly alarmed to find that Arthur had 
company. 
"Yes? Hello?" he called. "Has Mr. Dent come to his senses yet?" 
"Can we for the moment," called Ford, "assume that he hasn't?" 
"Well?" sighed Mr. Prosser. 
"And can we also assume," said Ford, "that he's going to be staying 
here all day?" 
"So?" 
"So all your men are going to be standing around all day doing 
nothing?" 
"Could be, could be..." 
"Well, if you're resigned to doing that anyway, you don't actually 
need him to lie here all the time do you?" 
"What?" 
"You don't," said Ford patiently, "actually need him here." 
Mr. Prosser thought about this. 
"Well no, not as such...", he said, "not exactly need..." Prosser was 
worried. He thought that one of them wasn't making a lot of sense. 
Ford said, "So if you would just like to take it as read that he's 
actually here, then he and I could slip off down to the pub for half an 
hour. How does that sound?" 
Mr. Prosser thought it sounded perfectly potty. 
"That sounds perfectly reasonable," he said in a reassuring tone of 
voice, wondering who he was trying to reassure. 
"And if you want to pop off for a quick one yourself later on," said 
Ford, "we can always cover up for you in return." 
"Thank you very much," said Mr. Prosser who no longer knew how 
to play this at all, "thank you very much, yes, that's very kind..." He 
frowned, then smiled, then tried to do both at once, failed, grasped 
hold of his fur hat and rolled it fitfully round the top of his head. He 
could only assume that he had just won. 
"So," continued Ford Prefect, "if you would just like to come over 
here and lie down..." 
"What?" said Mr. Prosser. 
"Ah, I'm sorry," said Ford, "perhaps I hadn't made myself fully clear. 
Somebody's got to lie in front of the bulldozers haven't they? Or there 
won't be anything to stop them driving into Mr. Dent's house will 
there?" 
"What?" said Mr. Prosser again. 
"It's very simple," said Ford, "my client, Mr. Dent, says that he will 
stop lying here in the mud on the sole condition that you come and 
take over from him." 
"What are you talking about?" said Arthur, but Ford nudged him 
with his shoe to be quiet. 
"You want me," said Mr. Prosser, spelling out this new thought to 
himself, "to come and lie there..." 
"Yes." 
"In front of the bulldozer?" 
"Yes." 
"Instead of Mr. Dent." 
"Yes." 
"In the mud." 
"In, as you say it, the mud." 
As soon as Mr. Prosser realized that he was substantially the loser 
after all, it was as if a weight lifted itself off his shoulders: this was 
more like the world as he knew it. He sighed. 
"In return for which you will take Mr. Dent with you down to the 
pub?" 
"That's it," said Ford. "That's it exactly." 
Mr. Prosser took a few nervous steps forward and stopped. 
"Promise?" 
"Promise," said Ford. He turned to Arthur. 
"Come on," he said to him, "get up and let the man lie down." 
Arthur stood up, feeling as if he was in a dream. 
Ford beckoned to Prosser who sadly, awkwardly, sat down in the 
mud. He felt that his whole life was some kind of dream and he 
sometimes wondered whose it was and whether they were enjoying 
it. The mud folded itself round his bottom and his arms and oozed 
into his shoes. 
Ford looked at him severely. 
"And no sneaky knocking down Mr. Dent's house whilst he's away, 
alright?" he said. 
"The mere thought," growled Mr. Prosser, "hadn't even begun to 
speculate," he continued, settling himself back, "about the merest 
possibility of crossing my mind." 
He saw the bulldozer driver's union representative approaching 
and let his head sink back and closed his eyes. He was trying to 
marshal his arguments for proving that he did not now constitute a 
mental health hazard himself. He was far from certain about this ʹ his 
mind seemed to be full of noise, horses, smoke, and the stench of 
blood. This always happened when he felt miserable and put upon, 
and he had never been able to explain it to himself. In a high 
dimension of which we know nothing the mighty Khan bellowed with 
rage, but Mr. Prosser only trembled slightly and whimpered. He 
began to fell little pricks of water behind the eyelids. Bureaucratic 
cock`ups, angry men lying in the mud, indecipherable strangers 
handing out inexplicable humiliations and an unidentified army of 
horsemen laughing at him in his head ʹ what a day. 
What a day. Ford Prefect knew that it didn't matter a pair of 
dingo's kidneys whether Arthur's house got knocked down or not now. 
Arthur remained very worried. 
"But can we trust him?" he said. 
"Myself I'd trust him to the end of the Earth," said Ford. 
"Oh yes," said Arthur, "and how far's that?" 
"About twelve minutes away," said Ford, "come on, I need a drink." 
Chapter 2
Here's what the Encyclopedia Galactica has to say about alcohol. It 
says that alcohol is a colourless volatile liquid formed by the 
fermentation of sugars and also notes its intoxicating effect on certain 
carbon`based life forms. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy also mentions alcohol. It says 
that the best drink in existence is the Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster. 
It says that the effect of a Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster is like having 
your brains smashed out by a slice of lemon wrapped round a large 
gold brick. 
The Guide also tells you on which planets the best Pan Galactic 
Gargle Blasters are mixed, how much you can expect to pay for one 
and what voluntary organizations exist to help you rehabilitate 
afterwards. 
The Guide even tells you how you can mix one yourself. 
Take the juice from one bottle of that Ol' Janx Spirit, it says. 
Pour into it one measure of water from the seas of Santraginus V ʹ
Oh that Santraginean sea water, it says. Oh those Santraginean fish    
Allow three cubes of Arcturan Mega`gin to melt into the mixture (it 
must be properly iced or the benzine is lost). 
Allow four litres of Fallian marsh gas to bubble through it, in 
memory of all those happy Hikers who have died of pleasure in the 
Marshes of Fallia. 
Over the back of a silver spoon float a measure of Qualactin 
Hypermint extract, redolent of all the heady odours of the dark 
Qualactin Zones, subtle sweet and mystic. 
Drop in the tooth of an Algolian Suntiger. Watch it dissolve, 
spreading the fires of the Algolian Suns deep into the heart of the 
drink. 
Sprinkle Zamphuor. 
Add an olive. 
Drink... but... very carefully... 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy sells rather better than the 
Encyclopedia Galactica. 
"Six pints of bitter," said Ford Prefect to the barman of the Horse 
and Groom. "And quickly please, the world's about to end." 
The barman of the Horse and Groom didn't deserve this sort of 
treatment, he was a dignified old man. He pushed his glasses up his 
nose and blinked at Ford Prefect. Ford ignored him and stared out of
the window, so the barman looked instead at Arthur who shrugged 
helplessly and said nothing. 
So the barman said, "Oh yes sir? Nice weather for it," and started 
pulling pints. 
He tried again. 
"Going to watch the match this afternoon then?" 
Ford glanced round at him. 
"No, no point," he said, and looked back out of the window. 
"What's that, foregone conclusion then you reckon sir?" said the 
barman. "Arsenal without a chance?" 
"No, no," said Ford, "it's just that the world's about to end." 
"Oh yes sir, so you said," said the barman, looking over his glasses 
this time at Arthur. "Lucky escape for Arsenal if it did." 
Ford looked back at him, genuinely surprised. 
"No, not really," he said. He frowned. 
The barman breathed in heavily. "There you are sir, six pints," he 
said. 
Arthur smiled at him wanly and shrugged again. He turned and 
smiled wanly at the rest of the pub just in case any of them had heard 
what was going on. 
None of them had, and none of them could understand what he 
was smiling at them for. 
A man sitting next to Ford at the bar looked at the two men, looked 
at the six pints, did a swift burst of mental arithmetic, arrived at an 
answer he liked and grinned a stupid hopeful grin at them. 
"Get off," said Ford, "They're ours," giving him a look that would 
have an Algolian Suntiger get on with what it was doing. 
Ford slapped a five`pound note on the bar. He said, "Keep the 
change." 
"What, from a fiver? Thank you sir." 
"You've got ten minutes left to spend it." 
The barman simply decided to walk away for a bit. 
"Ford," said Arthur, "would you please tell me what the hell is 
going on?" 
"Drink up," said Ford, "you've got three pints to get through." 
"Three pints?" said Arthur. "At lunchtime?" 
The man next to ford grinned and nodded happily. Ford ignored 
him. He said, "Time is an illusion. Lunchtime doubly so." 
"Very deep," said Arthur, "you should send that in to the Reader's 
Digest. They've got a page for people like you." 
"Drink up." 
"Why three pints all of a sudden?" 
"Muscle relaxant, you'll need it." 
"Muscle relaxant?" 
"Muscle relaxant." 
Arthur stared into his beer. 
"Did I do anything wrong today," he said, "or has the world always 
been like this and I've been too wrapped up in myself to notice?" 
"Alright," said Ford, "I'll try to explain. How long have we known 
each other?" 
"How long?" Arthur thought. "Er, about five years, maybe six," he 
said. "Most of it seemed to make some sense at the time." 
"Alright," said Ford. "How would you react if I said that I'm not 
from Guildford after all, but from a small planet somewhere in the 
vicinity of Betelgeuse?" 
Arthur shrugged in a so`so sort of way. 
"I don't know," he said, taking a pull of beer. "Why ʹ do you think 
it's the sort of thing you're likely to say?" 
Ford gave up. It really wasn't worth bothering at the moment, what 
with the world being about to end. He just said: 
"Drink up." 
He added, perfectly factually: 
"The world's about to end." 
Arthur gave the rest of the pub another wan smile. The rest of the 
pub frowned at him. A man waved at him to stop smiling at them and 
mind his own business. 
"This must be Thursday," said Arthur musing to himself, sinking low 
over his beer, "I never could get the hang of Thursdays." 
Chapter 3
On this particular Thursday, something was moving quietly through 
the ionosphere many miles above the surface of the planet; several 
somethings in fact, several dozen huge yellow chunky slablike 
somethings, huge as office buildings, silent as birds. They soared with 
ease, basking in electromagnetic rays from the star Sol, biding their 
time, grouping, preparing. 
The planet beneath them was almost perfectly oblivious of their 
presence, which was just how they wanted it for the moment. The 
huge yellow somethings went unnoticed at Goonhilly, they passed 
over Cape Canaveral without a blip, Woomera and Jodrell Bank 
looked straight through them ʹ which was a pity because it was 
exactly the sort of thing they'd been looking for all these years. 
The only place they registered at all was on a small black device 
called a Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matic which winked away quietly to itself. It 
nestled in the darkness inside a leather satchel which Ford Prefect 
wore habitually round his neck. The contents of Ford Prefect's satchel
were quite interesting in fact and would have made any Earth 
physicist's eyes pop out of his head, which is why he always concealed 
them by keeping a couple of dog`eared scripts for plays he pretended 
he was auditioning for stuffed in the top. Besides the Sub`Etha Sens`
O`Matic and the scripts he had an Electronic Thumb ʹ a short squat 
black rod, smooth and matt with a couple of flat switches and dials at 
one end; he also had a device which looked rather like a largish 
electronic calculator. This had about a hundred tiny flat press buttons 
and a screen about four inches square on which any one of a million 
"pages" could be summoned at a moment's notice. It looked insanely 
complicated, and this was one of the reasons why the snug plastic 
cover it fitted into had the words Don't Panic printed on it in large 
friendly letters. The other reason was that this device was in fact that 
most remarkable of all books ever to come out of the great publishing 
corporations of Ursa Minor ʹ The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. 
The reason why it was published in the form of a micro sub meson 
electronic component is that if it were printed in normal book form, 
an interstellar hitch hiker would require several inconveniently large 
buildings to carry it around in. 
Beneath that in Ford Prefect's satchel were a few biros, a notepad, 
and a largish bath towel from Marks and Spencer. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has a few things to say on the 
subject of towels. 
A towel, it says, is about the most massively useful thing an 
interstellar hitch hiker can have. Partly it has great practical value ʹ
you can wrap it around you for warmth as you bound across the cold 
moons of Jaglan Beta; you can lie on it on the brilliant marble`sanded 
beaches of Santraginus V, inhaling the heady sea vapours; you can 
sleep under it beneath the stars which shine so redly on the desert 
world of Kakrafoon; use it to sail a mini raft down the slow heavy river 
Moth; wet it for use in hand`to`hand`combat; wrap it round your 
head to ward off noxious fumes or to avoid the gaze of the Ravenous 
Bugblatter Beast of Traal (a mindboggingly stupid animal, it assumes 
that if you can't see it, it can't see you ʹ daft as a bush, but very 
ravenous); you can wave your towel in emergencies as a distress 
signal, and of course dry yourself off with it if it still seems to be clean 
enough. 
More importantly, a towel has immense psychological value. For 
some reason, if a strag (strag: non`hitch hiker) discovers that a hitch 
hiker has his towel with him, he will automatically assume that he is 
also in possession of a toothbrush, face flannel, soap, tin of biscuits, 
flask, compass, map, ball of string, gnat spray, wet weather gear, 
space suit etc., etc. Furthermore, the strag will then happily lend the 
hitch hiker any of these or a dozen other items that the hitch hiker 
might accidentally have "lost". What the strag will think is that any 
man who can hitch the length and breadth of the galaxy, rough it, 
slum it, struggle against terrible odds, win through, and still knows 
where his towel is is clearly a man to be reckoned with. 
Hence a phrase which has passed into hitch hiking slang, as in "Hey, 
you sass that hoopy Ford Prefect? There's a frood who really knows 
where his towel is." (Sass: know, be aware of, meet, have sex with; 
hoopy: really together guy; frood: really amazingly together guy.) 
Nestling quietly on top of the towel in Ford Prefect's satchel, the 
Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matic began to wink more quickly. Miles above the 
surface of the planet the huge yellow somethings began to fan out. At 
Jodrell Bank, someone decided it was time for a nice relaxing cup of 
tea. 
"You got a towel with you?" said Ford Prefect suddenly to Arthur. 
Arthur, struggling through his third pint, looked round at him. 
"Why? What, no... should I have?" He had given up being surprised, 
there didn't seem to be any point any longer. 
Ford clicked his tongue in irritation. 
"Drink up," he urged. 
At that moment the dull sound of a rumbling crash from outside 
filtered through the low murmur of the pub, through the sound of the 
jukebox, through the sound of the man next to Ford hiccupping over 
the whisky Ford had eventually bought him. 
Arthur choked on his beer, leapt to his feet. 
"What's that?" he yelped. 
"Don't worry," said Ford, "they haven't started yet." 
"Thank God for that," said Arthur and relaxed. 
"It's probably just your house being knocked down," said Ford, 
drowning his last pint. 
"What?" shouted Arthur. Suddenly Ford's spell was broken. Arthur 
looked wildly around him and ran to the window. 
"My God they are  They're knocking my house down. What the hell 
am I doing in the pub, Ford?" 
"It hardly makes any difference at this stage," said Ford, "let them 
have their fun." 
"Fun?" yelped Arthur. "Fun " He quickly checked out of the window 
again that they were talking about the same thing. 
"Damn their fun " he hooted and ran out of the pub furiously 
waving a nearly empty beer glass. He made no friends at all in the pub 
that lunchtime. 
"Stop, you vandals  You home wreckers " bawled Arthur. "You half 
crazed Visigoths, stop will you " 
Ford would have to go after him. Turning quickly to the barman he 
asked for four packets of peanuts. 
"There you are sir," said the barman, slapping the packets on the 
bar, "twenty`eight pence if you'd be so kind." 
Ford was very kind ʹ he gave the barman another five`pound note 
and told him to keep the change. The barman looked at it and then 
looked at Ford. He suddenly shivered: he experienced a momentary 
sensation that he didn't understand because no one on Earth had 
ever experienced it before. In moments of great stress, every life form 
that exists gives out a tiny sublimal signal. This signal simply 
communicates an exact and almost pathetic sense of how far that 
being is from the place of his birth. On Earth it is never possible to be 
further than sixteen thousand miles from your birthplace, which really 
isn't very far, so such signals are too minute to be noticed. Ford 
Prefect was at this moment under great stress, and he was born 600 
light years away in the near vicinity of Betelgeuse. 
The barman reeled for a moment, hit by a shocking, 
incomprehensible sense of distance. He didn't know what it meant, 
but he looked at Ford Prefect with a new sense of respect, almost 
awe. 
"Are you serious, sir?" he said in a small whisper which had the 
effect of silencing the pub. "You think the world's going to end?" 
"Yes," said Ford. 
"But, this afternoon?" 
Ford had recovered himself. He was at his flippest. 
"Yes," he said gaily, "in less than two minutes I would estimate." 
The barman couldn't believe the conversation he was having, but 
he couldn't believe the sensation he had just had either. 
"Isn't there anything we can do about it then?" he said. 
"No, nothing," said Ford, stuffing the peanuts into his pockets. 
Someone in the hushed bar suddenly laughed raucously at how 
stupid everyone had become. 
The man sitting next to Ford was a bit sozzled by now. His eyes 
waved their way up to Ford. 
"I thought," he said, "that if the world was going to end we were 
meant to lie down or put a paper bag over our head or something." 
"If you like, yes," said Ford. 
"That's what they told us in the army," said the man, and his eyes 
began the long trek back down to his whisky. 
"Will that help?" asked the barman. 
"No," said Ford and gave him a friendly smile. "Excuse me," he said, 
"I've got to go." With a wave, he left. 
The pub was silent for a moment longer, and then, embarrassingly 
enough, the man with the raucous laugh did it again. The girl he had 
dragged along to the pub with him had grown to loathe him dearly 
over the last hour or so, and it would probably have been a great 
satisfaction to her to know that in a minute and a half or so he would 
suddenly evaporate into a whiff of hydrogen, ozone and carbon 
monoxide. However, when the moment came she would be too busy 
evaporating herself to notice it. 
The barman cleared his throat. He heard himself say: 
"Last orders, please." 
The huge yellow machines began to sink downward and to move 
faster. 
Ford knew they were there. This wasn't the way he had wanted it. 
Running up the lane, Arthur had nearly reached his house. He 
didn't notice how cold it had suddenly become, he didn't notice the 
wind, he didn't notice the sudden irrational squall of rain. He didn't 
notice anything but the caterpillar bulldozers crawling over the rubble 
that had been his home. 
"You barbarians " he yelled. "I'll sue the council for every penny it's 
got  I'll have you hung, drawn and quartered  And whipped  And 
boiled... until... until... until you've had enough." 
Ford was running after him very fast. Very very fast. 
"And then I'll do it again " yelled Arthur. "And when I've finished I 
will take all the little bits, and I will jump on them " 
Arthur didn't notice that the men were running from the bulldozers; 
he didn't notice that Mr. Prosser was staring hectically into the sky. 
What Mr. Prosser had noticed was that huge yellow somethings were 
screaming through the clouds. Impossibly huge yellow somethings. 
"And I will carry on jumping on them," yelled Arthur, still running, 
"until I get blisters, or I can think of anything even more unpleasant to 
do, and then..." 
Arthur tripped, and fell headlong, rolled and landed flat on his back. 
At last he noticed that something was going on. His finger shot 
upwards. 
"What the hell's that?" he shrieked. 
Whatever it was raced across the sky in monstrous yellowness, tore 
the sky apart with mind`buggering noise and leapt off into the 
distance leaving the gaping air to shut behind it with a bang that 
drove your ears six feet into your skull. 
Another one followed and did the same thing only louder. 
It's difficult to say exactly what the people on the surface of the 
planet were doing now, because they didn't really know what they 
were doing themselves. None of it made a lot of sense ʹ running into 
houses, running out of houses, howling noiselessly at the noise. All 
around the world city streets exploded with people, cars slewed into 
each other as the noise fell on them and then rolled off like a tidal 
wave over hills and valleys, deserts and oceans, seeming to flatten 
everything it hit. 
Only one man stood and watched the sky, stood with terrible 
sadness in his eyes and rubber bungs in his ears. He knew exactly 
what was happening and had known ever since his Sub`Etha Sens`O`
Matic had started winking in the dead of night beside his pillar and 
woken him with a start. It was what he had waited for all these years, 
but when he had deciphered the signal pattern sitting alone in his 
small dark room a coldness had gripped him and squeezed his heart. 
Of all the races in all of the Galaxy who could have come and said a 
big hello to planet Earth, he thought, didn't it just have to be the 
Vogons. 
Still he knew what he had to do. As the Vogon craft screamed 
through the air high above him he opened his satchel. He threw away 
a copy of Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, he threw 
away a copy of Godspell: He wouldn't need them where he was going. 
Everything was ready, everything was prepared. 
He knew where his towel was. 
A sudden silence hit the Earth. If anything it was worse than the 
noise. For a while nothing happened. 
The great ships hung motionless in the air, over every nation on 
Earth. Motionless they hung, huge, heavy, steady in the sky, a 
blasphemy against nature. Many people went straight into shock as 
their minds tried to encompass what they were looking at. The ships 
hung in the sky in much the same way that bricks don't. 
And still nothing happened. 
Then there was a slight whisper, a sudden spacious whisper of 
open ambient sound. Every hi`fi set in the world, every radio, every 
television, every cassette recorder, every woofer, every tweeter, 
every mid`range driver in the world quietly turned itself on. 
Every tin can, every dust bin, every window, every car, every wine 
glass, every sheet of rusty metal became activated as an acoustically 
perfect sounding board. 
Before the Earth passed away it was going to be treated to the very 
ultimate in sound reproduction, the greatest public address system 
ever built. But there was no concert, no music, no fanfare, just a 
simple message. 
"People of Earth, your attention please," a voice said, and it was 
wonderful. Wonderful perfect quadrophonic sound with distortion 
levels so low as to make a brave man weep. 
"This is Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz of the Galactic Hyperspace Planning 
Council," the voice continued. "As you will no doubt be aware, the 
plans for development of the outlying regions of the Galaxy require 
the building of a hyperspatial express route through your star system, 
and regrettably your planet is one of those scheduled for demolition. 
The process will take slightly less that two of your Earth minutes. 
Thank you." 
The PA died away. 
Uncomprehending terror settled on the watching people of Earth. 
The terror moved slowly through the gathered crowds as if they were 
iron fillings on a sheet of board and a magnet was moving beneath 
them. Panic sprouted again, desperate fleeing panic, but there was 
nowhere to flee to. 
Observing this, the Vogons turned on their PA again. It said: 
"There's no point in acting all surprised about it. All the planning 
charts and demolition orders have been on display in your local 
planning department on Alpha Centauri for fifty of your Earth years, 
so you've had plenty of time to lodge any formal complaint and it's far 
too late to start making a fuss about it now." 
The PA fell silent again and its echo drifted off across the land. The 
huge ships turned slowly in the sky with easy power. On the 
underside of each a hatchway opened, an empty black space. 
By this time somebody somewhere must have manned a radio 
transmitter, located a wavelength and broadcasted a message back to 
the Vogon ships, to plead on behalf of the planet. Nobody ever heard 
what they said, they only heard the reply. The PA slammed back into 
life again. The voice was annoyed. It said: 
"What do you mean you've never been to Alpha Centauri? For 
heaven's sake mankind, it's only four light years away you know. I'm 
sorry, but if you can't be bothered to take an interest in local affairs 
that's your own lookout. 
"Energize the demolition beams." 
Light poured out into the hatchways. 
"I don't know," said the voice on the PA, "apathetic bloody planet, 
I've no sympathy at all." It cut off. 
There was a terrible ghastly silence. 
There was a terrible ghastly noise. 
There was a terrible ghastly silence. 
The Vogon Constructor fleet coasted away into the inky starry void. 
Chapter 4
Far away on the opposite spiral arm of the Galaxy, five hundred 
thousand light years from the star Sol, Zaphod Beeblebrox, President 
of the Imperial Galactic Government, sped across the seas of 
Damogran, his ion drive delta boat winking and flashing in the
Damogran sun. 
Damogran the hot; Damogran the remote; Damogran the almost 
totally unheard of. 
Damogran, secret home of the Heart of Gold. The boat sped on 
across the water. It would be some time before it reached its 
destination because Damogran is such an inconveniently arranged 
planet. It consists of nothing but middling to large desert islands 
separated by very pretty but annoyingly wide stretches of ocean. 
The boat sped on. 
Because of this topological awkwardness Damogran has always 
remained a deserted planet. This is why the Imperial Galactic 
Government chose Damogran for the Heart of Gold project, because 
it was so deserted and the Heart of Gold was so secret. 
The boat zipped and skipped across the sea, the sea that lay 
between the main islands of the only archipelago of any useful size on 
the whole planet. Zaphod Beeblebrox was on his way from the tiny 
spaceport on Easter Island (the name was an entirely meaningless 
coincidence ʹ in Galacticspeke, easter means small flat and light 
brown) to the Heart of Gold island, which by another meaningless 
coincidence was called France. 
One of the side effects of work on the Heart of Gold was a whole 
string of pretty meaningless coincidences. 
But it was not in any way a coincidence that today, the day of 
culmination of the project, the great day of unveiling, the day that the 
Heart of Gold was finally to be introduced to a marvelling Galaxy, was 
also a great day of culmination for Zaphod Beeblebrox. It was for the 
sake of this day that he had first decided to run for the Presidency, a 
decision which had sent waves of astonishment throughout the 
Imperial Galaxy. Zaphod Beeblebrox? President? Not the Zaphod 
Beeblebrox? Not the President? Many had seen it as a clinching proof 
that the whole of known creation had finally gone bananas. 
Zaphod grinned and gave the boat an extra kick of speed. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox, adventurer, ex`hippy, good timer, (crook? 
quite possibly), manic self`publicist, terribly bad at personal 
relationships, often thought to be completely out to lunch. 
President? 
No one had gone bananas, not in that way at least. 
Only six people in the entire Galaxy understood the principle on 
which the Galaxy was governed, and they knew that once Zaphod 
Beeblebrox had announced his intention to run as President it was 
more or less a fait accompli: he was the ideal Presidency fodder1. 
What they completely failed to understand was why Zaphod was 
doing it. 
He banked sharply, shooting a wild wall of water at the sun. 
Today was the day; today was the day when they would realize 
what Zaphod had been up to. Today was what Zaphod Beeblebrox's 
Presidency was all about. Today was also his two hundredth birthday, 
but that was just another meaningless coincidence. 
As he skipped his boat across the seas of Damogran he smiled 
quietly to himself about what a wonderful exciting day it was going to 
be. He relaxed and spread his two arms lazily across the seat back. He 
steered with an extra arm he'd recently fitted just beneath his right 
one to help improve his ski`boxing. 
"Hey," he cooed to himself, "you're a real cool boy you." But his 
nerves sang a song shriller than a dog whistle. 
The island of France was about twenty miles long, five miles across 
the middle, sandy and crescent shaped. In fact it seemed to exist not 
so much as an island in its own right as simply a means of defining the 
sweep and curve of a huge bay. This impression was heightened by 
the fact that the inner coastline of the crescent consisted almost 
entirely of steep cliffs. From the top of the cliff the land sloped slowly 
down five miles to the opposite shore. 
On top of the cliffs stood a reception committee. 
It consisted in large part of the engineers and researchers who had 
built the Heart of Gold ʹ mostly humanoid, but here and there were a 
few reptiloid atomineers, two or three green slyph`like 
maximegalacticans, an octopoid physucturalist or two and a 
Hooloovoo (a Hooloovoo is a super`intelligent shade of the color blue). 
All except the Hooloovoo were resplendent in their multi`colored 
ceremonial lab coats; the Hooloovoo had been temporarily refracted 
into a free standing prism for the occasion. 
There was a mood of immense excitement thrilling through all of 
them. Together and between them they had gone to and beyond the 
furthest limits of physical laws, restructured the fundamental fabric of 
matter, strained, twisted and broken the laws of possibility and 
impossibility, but still the greatest excitement of all seemed to be to 
meet a man with an orange sash round his neck. (An orange sash was 
what the President of the Galaxy traditionally wore.) It might not even 
have made much difference to them if they'd known exactly how 
much power the President of the Galaxy actually wielded: none at all. 
Only six people in the Galaxy knew that the job of the Galactic 
President was not to wield power but to attract attention away from 
it. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox was amazingly good at his job. 
The crowd gasped, dazzled by sun and seemanship, as the 
Presidential speedboat zipped round the headland into the bay. It 
flashed and shone as it came skating over the sea in wide skidding 
turns. 
In fact it didn't need to touch the water at all, because it was 
supported on a hazy cushion of ionized atoms ʹ but just for effect it 
was fitted with thin finblades which could be lowered into the water. 
They slashed sheets of water hissing into the air, carved deep gashes 
into the sea which swayed crazily and sank back foaming into the 
boat's wake as it careered across the bay. 
Zaphod loved effect: it was what he was best at. 
He twisted the wheel sharply, the boat slewed round in a wild 
scything skid beneath the cliff face and dropped to rest lightly on the 
rocking waves. 
Within seconds he ran out onto the deck and waved and grinned at 
over three billion people. The three billion people weren't actually 
there, but they watched his every gesture through the eyes of a small 
robot tri`D camera which hovered obsequiously in the air nearby. The 
antics of the President always made amazingly popular tri`D; that's 
what they were for. 
He grinned again. Three billion and six people didn't know it, but 
today would be a bigger antic than anyone had bargained for. 
The robot camera homed in for a close up on the more popular of 
his two heads and he waved again. He was roughly humanoid in 
appearance except for the extra head and third arm. His fair tousled 
hair stuck out in random directions, his blue eyes glinted with 
something completely unidentifiable, and his chins were almost 
always unshaven. 
A twenty`foot`high transparent globe floated next to his boat, 
rolling and bobbing, glistening in the brilliant sun. Inside it floated a 
wide semi`circular sofa upholstered in glorious red leather: the more 
the globe bobbed and rolled, the more the sofa stayed perfectly still, 
steady as an upholstered rock. Again, all done for effect as much as 
anything. 
Zaphod stepped through the wall of the globe and relaxed on the 
sofa. He spread his two arms lazily along the back and with the third 
brushed some dust off his knee. His heads looked about, smiling; he 
put his feet up. At any moment, he thought, he might scream. 
Water boiled up beneath the bubble, it seethed and spouted. The 
bubble surged into the air, bobbing and rolling on the water spout. Up, 
up it climbed, throwing stilts of light at the cliff. Up it surged on the 
jet, the water falling from beneath it, crashing back into the sea 
hundreds of feet below. 
Zaphod smiled, picturing himself. 
A thoroughly ridiculous form of transport, but a thoroughly 
beautiful one. 
At the top of the cliff the globe wavered for a moment, tipped on 
to a railed ramp, rolled down it to a small concave platform and 
riddled to a halt. 
To tremendous applause Zaphod Beeblebrox stepped out of the 
bubble, his orange sash blazing in the light. 
The President of the Galaxy had arrived. 
He waited for the applause to die down, then raised his hands in 
greeting. 
"Hi," he said. 
A government spider sidled up to him and attempted to press a 
copy of his prepared speech into his hands. Pages three to seven of 
the original version were at the moment floating soggily on the 
Damogran sea some five miles out from the bay. Pages one and two 
had been salvaged by a Damogran Frond Crested Eagle and had 
already become incorporated into an extraordinary new form of nest 
which the eagle had invented. It was constructed largely of paper and 
it was virtually impossible for a newly hatched baby eagle to break 
out of it. The Damogran Frond Crested Eagle had heard of the notion 
of survival of the species but wanted no truck with it. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox would not be needing his set speech and he 
gently deflected the one being offered him by the spider. 
"Hi," he said again. 
Everyone beamed at him, or, at least, nearly everyone. He singled 
out Trillian from the crowd. Trillian was a girl that Zaphod had picked 
up recently whilst visiting a planet, just for fun, incognito. She was 
slim, darkish, humanoid, with long waves of black hair, a full mouth, 
an odd little nob of a nose and ridiculously brown eyes. With her red 
head scarf knotted in that particular way and her long flowing silky 
brown dress she looked vaguely Arabic. Not that anyone there had 
ever heard of an Arab of course. The Arabs had very recently ceased 
to exist, and even when they had existed they were five hundred 
thousand light years from Damogran. Trillian wasn't anybody in 
particular, or so Zaphod claimed. She just went around with him 
rather a lot and told him what she thought of him. 
"Hi honey," he said to her. 
She flashed him a quick tight smile and looked away. Then she 
looked back for a moment and smiled more warmly ʹ but by this time 
he was looking at something else. 
"Hi," he said to a small knot of creatures from the press who were 
standing nearby wishing that he would stop saying Hi and get on with 
the quotes. He grinned at them particularly because he knew that in a 
few moments he would be giving them one hell of a quote. 
The next thing he said though was not a lot of use to them. One of 
the officials of the party had irritably decided that the President was 
clearly not in a mood to read the deliciously turned speech that had 
been written for him, and had flipped the switch on the remote 
control device in his pocket. Away in front of them a huge white dome 
that bulged against the sky cracked down in the middle, split, and 
slowly folded itself down into the ground. Everyone gasped although 
they had known perfectly well it was going to do that because they 
had built it that way. 
Beneath it lay uncovered a huge starship, one hundred and fifty 
metres long, shaped like a sleek running shoe, perfectly white and 
mindboggingly beautiful. At the heart of it, unseen, lay a small gold 
box which carried within it the most brain`wretching device ever 
conceived, a device which made this starship unique in the history of 
the galaxy, a device after which the ship had been named ʹ The Heart 
of Gold. 
"Wow", said Zaphod Beeblebrox to the Heart of Gold. There wasn't 
much else he could say. 
He said it again because he knew it would annoy the press. 
"Wow." 
The crowd turned their faces back towards him expectantly. He 
winked at Trillian who raised her eyebrows and widened her eyes at 
him. She knew what he was about to say and thought him a terrible 
showoff. 
"That is really amazing," he said. "That really is truly amazing. That 
is so amazingly amazing I think I'd like to steal it." 
A marvellous Presidential quote, absolutely true to form. The 
crowd laughed appreciatively, the newsmen gleefully punched 
buttons on their Sub`Etha News`Matics and the President grinned. 
As he grinned his heart screamed unbearably and he fingered the 
small Paralyso`Matic bomb that nestled quietly in his pocket. 
Finally he could bear it no more. He lifted his heads up to the sky, 
let out a wild whoop in major thirds, threw the bomb to the ground 
and ran forward through the sea of suddenly frozen smiles. 
Chapter 5
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was not a pleasant sight, even for other 
Vogons. His highly domed nose rose high above a small piggy 
forehead. His dark green rubbery skin was thick enough for him to 
play the game of Vogon Civil Service politics, and play it well, and 
waterproof enough for him to survive indefinitely at sea depths of up 
to a thousand feet with no ill effects. 
Not that he ever went swimming of course. His busy schedule 
would not allow it. He was the way he was because billions of years 
ago when the Vogons had first crawled out of the sluggish primeval 
seas of Vogsphere, and had lain panting and heaving on the planet's 
virgin shores... when the first rays of the bright young Vogsol sun had 
shone across them that morning, it was as if the forces of evolution 
had simply given up on them there and then, had turned aside in 
disgust and written them off as an ugly and unfortunate mistake. 
They never evolved again; they should never have survived. 
The fact that they did is some kind of tribute to the thick`willed 
slug`brained stubbornness of these creatures. Evolution? they said to 
themselves, Who needs it?, and what nature refused to do for them 
they simply did without until such time as they were able to rectify 
the grosser anatomical inconveniences with surgery. 
Meanwhile, the natural forces on the planet Vogsphere had been 
working overtime to make up for their earlier blunder. They brought 
forth scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs, which the Vogons ate, 
smashing their shells with iron mallets; tall aspiring trees with 
breathtaking slenderness and colour which the Vogons cut down and 
burned the crab meat with; elegant gazelle`like creatures with silken 
coats and dewy eyes which the Vogons would catch and sit on. They 
were no use as transport because their backs would snap instantly, 
but the Vogons sat on them anyway. 
Thus the planet Vogsphere whiled away the unhappy millennia 
until the Vogons suddenly discovered the principles of interstellar 
travel. Within a few short Vog years every last Vogon had migrated to 
the Megabrantis cluster, the political hub of the Galaxy and now 
formed the immensely powerful backbone of the Galactic Civil Service. 
They have attempted to acquire learning, they have attempted to 
acquire style and social grace, but in most respects the modern Vogon 
is little different from his primitive forebears. Every year they import 
twenty`seven thousand scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs from their 
native planet and while away a happy drunken night smashing them 
to bits with iron mallets. 
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was a fairly typical Vogon in that he was 
thoroughly vile. Also, he did not like hitchhikers. 
Somewhere in a small dark cabin buried deep in the intestines of 
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz's flagship, a small match flared nervously. The 
owner of the match was not a Vogon, but he knew all about them and 
was right to be nervous. His name was Ford Prefect2. 
He looked about the cabin but could see very little; strange 
monstrous shadows loomed and leaped with the tiny flickering flame, 
but all was quiet. He breathed a silent thank you to the Dentrassis. 
The Dentrassis are an unruly tribe of gourmands, a wild but pleasant 
bunch whom the Vogons had recently taken to employing as catering 
staff on their long haul fleets, on the strict understanding that they 
keep themselves very much to themselves. 
This suited the Dentrassis fine, because they loved Vogon money, 
which is one of the hardest currencies in space, but loathed the 
Vogons themselves. The only sort of Vogon a Dentrassi liked to see 
was an annoyed Vogon. 
It was because of this tiny piece of information that Ford Prefect 
was not now a whiff of hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide. 
He heard a slight groan. By the light of the match he saw a heavy 
shape moving slightly on the floor. Quickly he shook the match out, 
reached in his pocket, found what he was looking for and took it out. 
He crouched on the floor. The shape moved again. 
Ford Prefect said: "I bought some peanuts." 
Arthur Dent moved, and groaned again, muttering incoherently. 
"Here, have some," urged Ford, shaking the packet again, "if you've 
never been through a matter transference beam before you've 
probably lost some salt and protein. The beer you had should have 
cushioned your system a bit." 
"Whhhrrrr..." said Arthur Dent. He opened his eyes. 
"It's dark," he said. 
"Yes," said Ford Prefect, "it's dark." 
"No light," said Arthur Dent. "Dark, no light." 
One of the things Ford Prefect had always found hardest to 
understand about human beings was their habit of continually stating 
and repeating the obvious, as in It's a nice day, or You're very tall, or 
Oh dear you seem to have fallen down a thirty`foot well, are you 
alright? At first Ford had formed a theory to account for this strange 
behaviour. If human beings don't keep exercising their lips, he 
thought, their mouths probably seize up. After a few months' 
consideration and observation he abandoned this theory in favour of 
a new one. If they don't keep on exercising their lips, he thought, their 
brains start working. After a while he abandoned this one as well as 
being obstructively cynical and decided he quite liked human beings 
after all, but he always remained desperately worried about the 
terrible number of things they didn't know about. 
"Yes," he agreed with Arthur, "no light." He helped Arthur to some 
peanuts. "How do you feel?" he asked. 
"Like a military academy," said Arthur, "bits of me keep on passing 
out." 
Ford stared at him blankly in the darkness. 
"If I asked you where the hell we were," said Arthur weakly, "would 
I regret it?" 
Ford stood up. "We're safe," he said. 
"Oh good," said Arthur. 
"We're in a small galley cabin," said Ford, "in one of the spaceships 
of the Vogon Constructor Fleet." 
"Ah," said Arthur, "this is obviously some strange usage of the word 
safe that I wasn't previously aware of." 
Ford struck another match to help him search for a light switch. 
Monstrous shadows leaped and loomed again. Arthur struggled to his 
feet and hugged himself apprehensively. Hideous alien shapes 
seemed to throng about him, the air was thick with musty smells 
which sidled into his lungs without identifying themselves, and a low 
irritating hum kept his brain from focusing. 
"How did we get here?" he asked, shivering slightly. 
"We hitched a lift," said Ford. 
"Excuse me?" said Arthur. "Are you trying to tell me that we just 
stuck out our thumbs and some green bug`eyed monster stuck his 
head out and said, Hi fellas, hop right in. I can take you as far as the 
Basingstoke roundabout?" 
"Well," said Ford, "the Thumb's an electronic sub`etha signalling 
device, the roundabout's at Barnard's Star six light years away, but 
otherwise, that's more or less right." 
"And the bug`eyed monster?" 
"Is green, yes." 
"Fine," said Arthur, "when can I get home?" 
"You can't," said Ford Prefect, and found the light switch. 
"Shade your eyes..." he said, and turned it on. 
Even Ford was surprised. 
"Good grief," said Arthur, "is this really the interior of a flying 
saucer?" 
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz heaved his unpleasant green body round the 
control bridge. He always felt vaguely irritable after demolishing 
populated planets. He wished that someone would come and tell him 
that it was all wrong so that he could shout at them and feel better. 
He flopped as heavily as he could on to his control seat in the hope 
that it would break and give him something to be genuinely angry 
about, but it only gave a complaining sort of creak. 
"Go away " he shouted at a young Vogon guard who entered the 
bridge at that moment. The guard vanished immediately, feeling 
rather relieved. He was glad it wouldn't now be him who delivered 
the report they'd just received. The report was an official release 
which said that a wonderful new form of spaceship drive was at this 
moment being unveiled at a government research base on Damogran 
which would henceforth make all hyperspatial express routes 
unnecessary. 
Another door slid open, but this time the Vogon captain didn't 
shout because it was the door from the galley quarters where the 
Dentrassis prepared his meals. A meal would be most welcome. 
A huge furry creature bounded through the door with his lunch 
tray. It was grinning like a maniac. 
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was delighted. He knew that when a 
Dentrassi looked that pleased with itself there was something going 
on somewhere on the ship that he could get very angry indeed about. 
Ford and Arthur stared about them. 
"Well, what do you think?" said Ford. 
"It's a bit squalid, isn't it?" 
Ford frowned at the grubby mattress, unwashed cups and 
unidentifiable bits of smelly alien underwear that lay around the 
cramped cabin. 
"Well, this is a working ship, you see," said Ford. "These are the 
Dentrassi sleeping quarters." 
"I thought you said they were called Vogons or something." 
"Yes," said Ford, "the Vogons run the ship, the Dentrassis are the 
cooks, they let us on board." 
"I'm confused," said Arthur. 
"Here, have a look at this," said Ford. He sat down on one of the 
mattresses and rummaged about in his satchel. Arthur prodded the 
mattress nervously and then sat on it himself: in fact he had very little 
to be nervous about, because all mattresses grown in the swamps of 
Squornshellous Zeta are very thoroughly killed and dried before being 
put to service. Very few have ever come to life again. 
Ford handed the book to Arthur. 
"What is it?" asked Arthur. 
"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It's a sort of electronic book. 
It tells you everything you need to know about anything. That's its 
job." 
Arthur turned it over nervously in his hands. 
"I like the cover," he said. "Don't Panic. It's the first helpful or 
intelligible thing anybody's said to me all day." 
"I'll show you how it works," said Ford. He snatched it from Arthur 
who was still holding it as if it was a two`week`dead lark and pulled it 
out of its cover. 
"You press this button here you see and the screen lights up giving 
you the index." 
A screen, about three inches by four, lit up and characters began to 
flicker across the surface. 
"You want to know about Vogons, so I enter that name so." His 
fingers tapped some more keys. "And there we are." 
The words Vogon Constructor Fleets flared in green across the 
screen. 
Ford pressed a large red button at the bottom of the screen and 
words began to undulate across it. At the same time, the book began 
to speak the entry as well in a still quiet measured voice. This is what 
the book said. 
"Vogon Constructor Fleets. Here is what to do if you want to get a 
lift from a Vogon: forget it. They are one of the most unpleasant races 
in the Galaxy ʹ not actually evil, but bad tempered, bureaucratic, 
officious and callous. They wouldn't even lift a finger to save their 
own grandmothers from the Ravenous Bugblatter Beast of Traal 
without orders signed in triplicate, sent in, sent back, queried, lost, 
found, subjected to public inquiry, lost again, and finally buried in soft 
peat and recycled as firelighters." 
"The best way to get a drink out of a Vogon is to stick your finger 
down his throat, and the best way to irritate him is to feed his 
grandmother to the Ravenous Bugblatter Beast of Traal." 
"On no account allow a Vogon to read poetry at you." 
Arthur blinked at it. 
"What a strange book. How did we get a lift then?" 
"That's the point, it's out of date now," said Ford, sliding the book 
back into its cover. "I'm doing the field research for the New Revised 
Edition, and one of the things I'll have to include is a bit about how 
the Vogons now employ Dentrassi cooks which gives us a rather 
useful little loophole." 
A pained expression crossed Arthur's face. "But who are the 
Dentrassi?" he said. 
"Great guys," said Ford. "They're the best cooks and the best drink 
mixers and they don't give a wet slap about anything else. And they'll 
always help hitchhikers aboard, partly because they like the company, 
but mostly because it annoys the Vogons. Which is exactly the sort of 
thing you need to know if you're an impoverished hitch hiker trying to 
see the marvels of the Universe for less than thirty Altairan Dollars a 
day. And that's my job. Fun, isn't it?" 
Arthur looked lost. 
"It's amazing," he said and frowned at one of the other mattresses. 
"Unfortunately I got stuck on the Earth for rather longer than I 
intended," said Ford. "I came for a week and got stuck for fifteen 
years." 
"But how did you get there in the first place then?" 
"Easy, I got a lift with a teaser." 
"A teaser?" 
"Yeah." 
"Er, what is..." 
"A teaser? Teasers are usually rich kids with nothing to do. They 
cruise around looking for planets which haven't made interstellar 
contact yet and buzz them." 
"Buzz them?" Arthur began to feel that Ford was enjoying making 
life difficult for him. 
"Yeah", said Ford, "they buzz them. They find some isolated spot 
with very few people around, then land right by some poor soul 
whom no one's ever going to believe and then strut up and down in 
front of him wearing silly antennae on their heads and making beep 
beep noises. Rather childish really." Ford leant back on the mattress 
with his hands behind his head and looked infuriatingly pleased with 
himself. 
"Ford," insisted Arthur, "I don't know if this sounds like a silly 
question, but what am I doing here?" 
"Well you know that," said Ford. "I rescued you from the Earth." 
"And what's happened to the Earth?" 
"Ah. It's been demolished." 
"Has it," said Arthur levelly. 
"Yes. It just boiled away into space."
"Look," said Arthur, "I'm a bit upset about that." 
Ford frowned to himself and seemed to roll the thought around his 
mind. 
"Yes, I can understand that," he said at last. 
"Understand that " shouted Arthur. "Understand that " 
Ford sprang up. 
"Keep looking at the book " he hissed urgently. 
"What?" 
"Don't Panic." 
"I'm not panicking " 
"Yes you are." 
"Alright so I'm panicking, what else is there to do?" 
"You just come along with me and have a good time. The Galaxy's a 
fun place. You'll need to have this fish in your ear." 
"I beg your pardon?" asked Arthur, rather politely he thought. 
Ford was holding up a small glass jar which quite clearly had a small 
yellow fish wriggling around in it. Arthur blinked at him. He wished 
there was something simple and recognizable he could grasp hold of. 
He would have felt safe if alongside the Dentrassi underwear, the 
piles of Squornshellous mattresses and the man from Betelgeuse 
holding up a small yellow fish and offering to put it in his ear he had 
been able to see just a small packet of corn flakes. He couldn't, and he 
didn't feel safe. 
Suddenly a violent noise leapt at them from no source that he 
could identify. He gasped in terror at what sounded like a man trying 
to gargle whilst fighting off a pack of wolves. 
"Shush " said Ford. "Listen, it might be important." 
"Im... important?" 
"It's the Vogon captain making an announcement on the T'annoy." 
"You mean that's how the Vogons talk?" 
"Listen " 
"But I can't speak Vogon " 
"You don't need to. Just put that fish in your ear." 
Ford, with a lightning movement, clapped his hand to Arthur's ear, 
and he had the sudden sickening sensation of the fish slithering deep 
into his aural tract. Gasping with horror he scrabbled at his ear for a 
second or so, but then slowly turned goggle`eyed with wonder. He 
was experiencing the aural equivalent of looking at a picture of two 
black silhouetted faces and suddenly seeing it as a picture of a white 
candlestick. Or of looking at a lot of coloured dots on a piece of paper 
which suddenly resolve themselves into the figure six and mean that 
your optician is going to charge you a lot of money for a new pair of 
glasses. 
He was still listening to the howling gargles, he knew that, only 
now it had taken on the semblance of perfectly straightforward 
English. 
This is what he heard... 
Chapter 6
"Howl howl gargle howl gargle howl howl howl gargle howl gargle 
howl howl gargle gargle howl gargle gargle gargle howl slurrp uuuurgh 
should have a good time. Message repeats. This is your captain 
speaking, so stop whatever you're doing and pay attention. First of all 
I see from our instruments that we have a couple of hitchhikers 
aboard. Hello wherever you are. I just want to make it totally clear 
that you are not at all welcome. I worked hard to get where I am 
today, and I didn't become captain of a Vogon constructor ship simply 
so I could turn it into a taxi service for a load of degenerate 
freeloaders. I have sent out a search party, and as soon that they find 
you I will put you off the ship. If you're very lucky I might read you 
some of my poetry first." 
"Secondly, we are about to jump into hyperspace for the journey to 
Barnard's Star. On arrival we will stay in dock for a seventy`two hour 
refit, and no one's to leave the ship during that time. I repeat, all 
planet leave is cancelled. I've just had an unhappy love affair, so I 
don't see why anybody else should have a good time. Message ends." 
The noise stopped. 
Arthur discovered to his embarrassment that he was lying curled 
up in a small ball on the floor with his arms wrapped round his head. 
He smiled weakly. 
"Charming man," he said. "I wish I had a daughter so I could forbid 
her to marry one..." 
"You wouldn't need to," said Ford. "They've got as much sex appeal 
as a road accident. No, don't move," he added as Arthur began to 
uncurl himself, "you'd better be prepared for the jump into 
hyperspace. It's unpleasantly like being drunk." 
"What's so unpleasant about being drunk?" 
"You ask a glass of water." 
Arthur thought about this. 
"Ford," he said. 
"Yeah?" 
"What's this fish doing in my ear?" 
"It's translating for you. It's a Babel fish. Look it up in the book if 
you like." 
He tossed over The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and then 
curled himself up into a foetal ball to prepare himself for the jump. 
At that moment the bottom fell out of Arthur's mind. 
His eyes turned inside out. His feet began to leak out of the top of 
his head. 
The room folded flat about him, spun around, shifted out of 
existence and left him sliding into his own navel. 
They were passing through hyperspace. 
"The Babel fish," said The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy quietly, 
"is small, yellow and leech`like, and probably the oddest thing in the 
Universe. It feeds on brainwave energy not from its carrier but from 
those around it. It absorbs all unconscious mental frequencies from 
this brainwave energy to nourish itself with. It then excretes into the 
mind of its carrier a telepathic matrix formed by combining the 
conscious thought frequencies with nerve signals picked up from the 
speech centres of the brain which has supplied them. The practical 
upshot of all this is that if you stick a Babel fish in your ear you can 
instantly understand anything said to you in any form of language. 
The speech patterns you actually hear decode the brainwave matrix 
which has been fed into your mind by your Babel fish." 
"Now it is such a bizarrely improbable coincidence that anything so 
mindboggingly useful could have evolved purely by chance that some 
thinkers have chosen to see it as the final and clinching proof of the 
non`existence of God." 
"The argument goes something like this: 'I refuse to prove that I 
exist,' says God, 'for proof denies faith, and without faith I am 
nothing.'" 
"'But,' says Man, 'The Babel fish is a dead giveaway, isn't it? It could 
not have evolved by chance. It proves you exist, and so therefore, by 
your own arguments, you don't. QED.'" 
"'Oh dear,' says God, 'I hadn't thought of that,' and promptly 
vanished in a puff of logic." 
"'Oh, that was easy,' says Man, and for an encore goes on to prove 
that black is white and gets himself killed on the next zebra crossing." 
"Most leading theologians claim that this argument is a load of 
dingo's kidneys, but that didn't stop Oolon Colluphid making a small 
fortune when he used it as the central theme of his best`selling book 
Well That About Wraps It Up For God." 
"Meanwhile, the poor Babel fish, by effectively removing all 
barriers to communication between different races and cultures, has 
caused more and bloddier wars than anything else in the history of 
creation." 
Arthur let out a low groan. He was horrified to discover that the 
kick through hyperspace hadn't killed him. He was now six light years 
from the place that the Earth would have been if it still existed. 
The Earth. 
Visions of it swam sickeningly through his nauseated mind. There 
was no way his imagination could feel the impact of the whole Earth
having gone, it was too big. He prodded his feelings by thinking that 
his parents and his sister had gone. No reaction. He thought of all the 
people he had been close to. No reaction. Then he thought of a 
complete stranger he had been standing behind in the queue at the 
supermarket before and felt a sudden stab ʹ the supermarket was 
gone, everything in it was gone. Nelson's Column had gone  Nelson's 
Column had gone and there would be no outcry, because there was 
no one left to make an outcry. From now on Nelson's Column only 
existed in his mind. England only existed in his mind ʹ his mind, stuck 
here in this dank smelly steel`lined spaceship. A wave of 
claustrophobia closed in on him. 
England no longer existed. He'd got that ʹ somehow he'd got it. He 
tried again. America, he thought, has gone. He couldn't grasp it. He 
decided to start smaller again. New York has gone. No reaction. He'd 
never seriously believed it existed anyway. The dollar, he thought, 
had sunk for ever. Slight tremor there. Every Bogart movie has been 
wiped, he said to himself, and that gave him a nasty knock. 
McDonalds, he thought. There is no longer any such thing as a 
McDonald's hamburger. 
He passed out. When he came round a second later he found he 
was sobbing for his mother. 
He jerked himself violently to his feet. 
"Ford " 
Ford looked up from where he was sitting in a corner humming to 
himself. He always found the actual travelling`through`space part of 
space travel rather trying. 
"Yeah?" he said. 
"If you're a researcher on this book thing and you were on Earth, 
you must have been gathering material on it." 
"Well, I was able to extend the original entry a bit, yes." 
"Let me see what it says in this edition then, I've got to see it." 
"Yeah OK." He passed it over again. 
Arthur grabbed hold of it and tried to stop his hands shaking. He 
pressed the entry for the relevant page. The screen flashed and 
swirled and resolved into a page of print. Arthur stared at it. 
"It doesn't have an entry " he burst out. 
Ford looked over his shoulder. 
"Yes it does," he said, "down there, see at the bottom of the screen, 
just under Eccentrica Gallumbits, the triple`breasted whore of 
Eroticon 6." 
Arthur followed Ford's finger, and saw where it was pointing. For a 
moment it still didn't register, then his mind nearly blew up. 
"What? Harmless? Is that all it's got to say? Harmless  One word " 
Ford shrugged. 
"Well, there are a hundred billion stars in the Galaxy, and only a 
limited amount of space in the book's microprocessors," he said, "and 
no one knew much about the Earth of course." 
"Well for God's sake I hope you managed to rectify that a bit." 
"Oh yes, well I managed to transmit a new entry off to the editor. 
He had to trim it a bit, but it's still an improvement." 
"And what does it say now?" asked Arthur. 
"Mostly harmless," admitted Ford with a slightly embarrassed 
cough. 
"Mostly harmless " shouted Arthur. 
"What was that noise?" hissed Ford. 
"It was me shouting," shouted Arthur. 
"No  Shut up " said Ford. I think we're in trouble." 
"You think we're in trouble " 
Outside the door were the sounds of marching feet. 
"The Dentrassi?" whispered Arthur. 
"No, those are steel tipped boots," said Ford. 
There was a sharp ringing rap on the door. 
"Then who is it?" said Arthur. 
"Well," said Ford, "if we're lucky it's just the Vogons come to throw 
us in to space." 
"And if we're unlucky?" 
"If we're unlucky," said Ford grimly, "the captain might be serious 
in his threat that he's going to read us some of his poetry first..." 
Chapter 7
Vogon poetry is of course the third worst in the Universe. 
The second worst is that of the Azagoths of Kria. During a recitation 
by their Poet Master Grunthos the Flatulent of his poem "Ode To A 
Small Lump of Green Putty I Found In My Armpit One Midsummer 
Morning" four of his audience died of internal haemorrhaging, and 
the President of the Mid`Galactic Arts Nobbling Council survived by 
gnawing one of his own legs off. Grunthos is reported to have been 
"disappointed" by the poem's reception, and was about to embark on 
a reading of his twelve`book epic entitled My Favourite Bathtime 
Gurgles when his own major intestine, in a desperate attempt to save 
life and civilization, leapt straight up through his neck and throttled 
his brain. 
The very worst poetry of all perished along with its creator Paula 
Nancy Millstone Jennings of Greenbridge, Essex, England in the 
destruction of the planet Earth. 
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz smiled very slowly. This was done not so 
much for effect as because he was trying to remember the sequence 
of muscle movements. He had had a terribly therapeutic yell at his 
prisoners and was now feeling quite relaxed and ready for a little 
callousness. 
The prisoners sat in Poetry Appreciation Chairs ʹ strapped in. 
Vogons suffered no illusions as to the regard their works were 
generally held in. Their early attempts at composition had been part 
of bludgeoning insistence that they be accepted as a properly evolved 
and cultured race, but now the only thing that kept them going was 
sheer bloodymindedness. 
The sweat stood out cold on Ford Prefect's brow, and slid round 
the electrodes strapped to his temples. These were attached to a 
battery of electronic equipment ʹ imagery intensifiers, rhythmic 
modulators, alliterative residulators and simile dumpers ʹ all designed 
to heighten the experience of the poem and make sure that not a 
single nuance of the poet's thought was lost. 
Arthur Dent sat and quivered. He had no idea what he was in for, 
but he knew that he hadn't liked anything that had happened so far 
and didn't think things were likely to change. 
The Vogon began to read ʹ a fetid little passage of his own devising. 
"Oh frettled gruntbuggly..." he began. Spasms wracked Ford's body
ʹ this was worse than ever he'd been prepared for. 
"?... thy micturations are to me | As plurdled gabbleblotchits on a 
lurgid bee." 
"Aaaaaaarggggghhhhhh " went Ford Prefect, wrenching his head 
back as lumps of pain thumped through it. He could dimly see beside 
him Arthur lolling and rolling in his seat. He clenched his teeth. 
"Groop I implore thee," continued the merciless Vogon, "my 
foonting turlingdromes." 
His voice was rising to a horrible pitch of impassioned stridency. 
"And hooptiously drangle me with crinkly bindlewurdles,| Or I will 
rend thee in the gobberwarts with my blurglecruncheon, see if I 
don't " 
"Nnnnnnnnnnyyyyyyyuuuuuuurrrrrrrggggggghhhhh " cried Ford 
Prefect and threw one final spasm as the electronic enhancement of 
the last line caught him full blast across the temples. He went limp. 
Arthur lolled. 
"Now Earthlings..." whirred the Vogon (he didn't know that Ford 
Prefect was in fact from a small planet in the vicinity of Betelgeuse, 
and wouldn't have cared if he had) "I present you with a simple choice  
Either die in the vacuum of space, or..." he paused for melodramatic 
effect, "tell me how good you thought my poem was " 
He threw himself backwards into a huge leathery bat`shaped seat 
and watched them. He did the smile again. 
Ford was rasping for breath. He rolled his dusty tongue round his 
parched mouth and moaned. 
Arthur said brightly: "Actually I quite liked it." 
Ford turned and gaped. Here was an approach that had quite 
simply not occurred to him. 
The Vogon raised a surprised eyebrow that effectively obscured his 
nose and was therefore no bad thing. 
"Oh good..." he whirred, in considerable astonishment. 
"Oh yes," said Arthur, "I thought that some of the metaphysical 
imagery was really particularly effective." 
Ford continued to stare at him, slowly organizing his thoughts 
around this totally new concept. Were they really going to be able to 
bareface their way out of this? 
"Yes, do continue..." invited the Vogon. 
"Oh... and er... interesting rhythmic devices too," continued Arthur, 
"which seemed to counterpoint the... er... er..." He floundered. 
Ford leaped to his rescue, hazarding "counterpoint the surrealism 
of the underlying metaphor of the... er..." He floundered too, but 
Arthur was ready again. 
"... humanity of the..." 
"Vogonity," Ford hissed at him. 
"Ah yes, Vogonity (sorry) of the poet's compassionate soul," Arthur 
felt he was on a home stretch now, "which contrives through the 
medium of the verse structure to sublimate this, transcend that, and 
come to terms with the fundamental dichotomies of the other," (he 
was reaching a triumphant crescendo...) "and one is left with a 
profound and vivid insight into... into... er..." (... which suddenly gave 
out on him.) Ford leaped in with the coup de grace: 
"Into whatever it was the poem was about " he yelled. Out of the 
corner of his mouth: "Well done, Arthur, that was very good." 
The Vogon perused them. For a moment his embittered racial soul 
had been touched, but he thought no ʹ too little too late. His voice 
took on the quality of a cat snagging brushed nylon. 
"So what you're saying is that I write poetry because underneath 
my mean callous heartless exterior I really just want to be loved," he 
said. He paused. "Is that right?" 
Ford laughed a nervous laugh. "Well I mean yes," he said, "don't 
we all, deep down, you know... er..." 
The Vogon stood up. 
"No, well you're completely wrong," he said, "I just write poetry to 
throw my mean callous heartless exterior into sharp relief. I'm going 
to throw you off the ship anyway. Guard  Take the prisoners to 
number three airlock and throw them out " 
"What?" shouted Ford. 
A huge young Vogon guard stepped forward and yanked them out 
of their straps with his huge blubbery arms. 
"You can't throw us into space," yelled Ford, "we're trying to write 
a book." 
"Resistance is useless " shouted the Vogon guard back at him. It 
was the first phrase he'd learnt when he joined the Vogon Guard 
Corps. 
The captain watched with detached amusement and then turned 
away. 
Arthur stared round him wildly. 
"I don't want to die now " he yelled. "I've still got a headache  I 
don't want to go to heaven with a headache, I'd be all cross and 
wouldn't enjoy it " 
The guard grasped them both firmly round the neck, and bowing 
deferentially towards his captain's back, hoiked them both protesting 
out of the bridge. A steel door closed and the captain was on his own 
again. He hummed quietly and mused to himself, lightly fingering his 
notebook of verses. 
"Hmmmm," he said, "counterpoint the surrealism of the underlying 
metaphor..." He considered this for a moment, and then closed the 
book with a grim smile. 
"Death's too good for them," he said. 
The long steel`lined corridor echoed to the feeble struggles of the 
two humanoids clamped firmly under rubbery Vogon armpits. 
"This is great," spluttered Arthur, "this is really terrific. Let go of me 
you brute " 
The Vogon guard dragged them on. 
"Don't you worry," said Ford, "I'll think of something." He didn't 
sound hopeful. 
"Resistance is useless " bellowed the guard. 
"Just don't say things like that," stammered Ford. "How can anyone 
maintain a positive mental attitude if you're saying things like that?" 
"My God," complained Arthur, "you're talking about a positive 
mental attitude and you haven't even had your planet demolished 
today. I woke up this morning and thought I'd have a nice relaxed day, 
do a bit of reading, brush the dog... It's now just after four in the 
afternoon and I'm already thrown out of an alien spaceship six light 
years from the smoking remains of the Earth " He spluttered and 
gurgled as the Vogon tightened his grip. 
"Alright," said Ford, "just stop panicking." 
"Who said anything about panicking?" snapped Arthur. "This is still 
just the culture shock. You wait till I've settled down into the situation 
and found my bearings. Then I'll start panicking." 
"Arthur you're getting hysterical. Shut up " Ford tried desperately 
to think, but was interrupted by the guard shouting again. 
"Resistance is useless " 
"And you can shut up as well " snapped Ford. 
"Resistance is useless " 
"Oh give it a rest," said Ford. He twisted his head till he was looking 
straight up into his captor's face. A thought struck him. 
"Do you really enjoy this sort of thing?" he asked suddenly. 
The Vogon stopped dead and a look of immense stupidity seeped 
slowly over his face. 
"Enjoy?" he boomed. "What do you mean?" 
"What I mean," said Ford, "is does it give you a full satisfying life? 
Stomping around, shouting, pushing people out of spaceships..." 
The Vogon stared up at the low steel ceiling and his eyebrows 
almost rolled over each other. His mouth slacked. Finally he said, 
"Well the hours are good..." 
"They'd have to be," agreed Ford. 
Arthur twisted his head to look at Ford. 
"Ford, what are you doing?" he asked in an amazed whisper. 
"Oh, just trying to take an interest in the world around me, OK?" he 
said. "So the hours are pretty good then?" he resumed. 
The Vogon stared down at him as sluggish thoughts moiled around 
in the murky depths. 
"Yeah," he said, "but now you come to mention it, most of the 
actual minutes are pretty lousy. Except..." he thought again, which 
required looking at the ceiling ʹ "except some of the shouting I quite 
like." He filled his lungs and bellowed, "Resistance is..." 
"Sure, yes," interrupted Ford hurriedly, "you're good at that, I can 
tell. But if it's mostly lousy," he said, slowly giving the words time to 
reach their mark, "then why do you do it? What is it? The girls? The 
leather? The machismo? Or do you just find that coming to terms 
with the mindless tedium of it all presents an interesting challenge?" 
"Er..." said the guard, "er... er... I dunno. I think I just sort of... do it 
really. My aunt said that spaceship guard was a good career for a 
young Vogon ʹ you know, the uniform, the low`slung stun ray holster, 
the mindless tedium..." 
"There you are Arthur," said Ford with the air of someone reaching 
the conclusion of his argument, "you think you've got problems." 
Arthur rather thought he had. Apart from the unpleasant business 
with his home planet the Vogon guard had half`throttled him already 
and he didn't like the sound of being thrown into space very much. 
"Try and understand his problem," insisted Ford. "Here he is poor 
lad, his entire life's work is stamping around, throwing people off 
spaceships..." 
"And shouting," added the guard. 
"And shouting, sure," said Ford patting the blubbery arm clamped 
round his neck in friendly condescension, "... and he doesn't even 
know why he's doing it " 
Arthur agreed this was very sad. He did this with a small feeble 
gesture, because he was too asphyxicated to speak. 
Deep rumblings of bemusement came from the guard. 
"Well. Now you put it like that I suppose..." 
"Good lad " encouraged Ford. 
"But alright," went on the rumblings, "so what's the alternative?" 
"Well," said Ford, brightly but slowly, "stop doing it of course  Tell 
them," he went on, "you're not going to do it anymore." He felt he 
had to add something to that, but for the moment the guard seemed 
to have his mind occupied pondering that much. 
"Eerrrrrrmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm..." said the guard, 
"erm, well that doesn't sound that great to me." 
Ford suddenly felt the moment slipping away. 
"Now wait a minute," he said, "that's just the start you see, there's 
more to it than that you see..." 
But at that moment the guard renewed his grip and continued his 
original purpose of lugging his prisoners to the airlock. He was 
obviously quite touched. 
"No, I think if it's all the same to you," he said, "I'd better get you 
both shoved into this airlock and then go and get on with some other 
bits of shouting I've got to do." 
It wasn't all the same to Ford Prefect after all. 
"Come on now... but look " he said, less slowly, less brightly. 
"Huhhhhgggggggnnnnnnn..." said Arthur without any clear 
inflection. 
"But hang on," pursued Ford, "there's music and art and things to 
tell you about yet  Arrrggghhh " 
"Resistance is useless," bellowed the guard, and then added, "You 
see if I keep it up I can eventually get promoted to Senior Shouting 
Officer, and there aren't usually many vacancies for non`shouting and 
non`pushing`people`about officers, so I think I'd better stick to what I 
know." 
They had now reached the airlock ʹ a large circular steel hatchway 
of massive strength and weight let into the inner skin of the craft. The 
guard operated a control and the hatchway swung smoothly open. 
"But thanks for taking an interest," said the Vogon guard. "Bye 
now." He flung Ford and Arthur through the hatchway into the small 
chamber within. Arthur lay panting for breath. Ford scrambled round 
and flung his shoulder uselessly against the reclosing hatchway. 
"But listen," he shouted to the guard, "there's a whole world you 
don't know anything about... here how about this?" Desperately he 
grabbed for the only bit of culture he knew offhand ʹ he hummed the 
first bar of Beethoven's Fifth. 
"Da da da dum  Doesn't that stir anything in you?" 
"No," said the guard, "not really. But I'll mention it to my aunt." 
If he said anything further after that it was lost. The hatchway 
sealed itself tight, and all sound was lost but the faint distant hum of 
the ship's engines. 
They were in a brightly polished cylindrical chamber about six feet 
in diameter and ten feet long. 
"Potentially bright lad I thought," he said and slumped against the 
curved wall. 
Arthur was still lying in the curve of the floor where he had fallen. 
He didn't look up. He just lay panting. 
"We're trapped now aren't we?" 
"Yes," said Ford, "we're trapped." 
"Well didn't you think of anything? I thought you said you were 
going to think of something. Perhaps you thought of something and 
didn't notice." 
"Oh yes, I thought of something," panted Ford. Arthur looked up 
expectantly. 
"But unfortunately," continued Ford, "it rather involved being on 
the other side of this airtight hatchway." He kicked the hatch they'd 
just been through. 
"But it was a good idea was it?" 
"Oh yes, very neat." 
"What was it?" 
"Well I hadn't worked out the details yet. Not much point now is 
there?" 
"So... er, what happens next?" 
"Oh, er, well the hatchway in front of us will open automatically in 
a few moments and we will shoot out into deep space I expect and 
asphyxicate. If you take a lungful of air with you you can last for up to 
thirty seconds of course..." said Ford. He stuck his hands behind his 
back, raised his eyebrows and started to hum an old Betelgeusian 
battle hymn. To Arthur's eyes he suddenly looked very alien. 
"So this is it," said Arthur, "we're going to die." 
"Yes," said Ford, "except... no  Wait a minute " he suddenly lunged 
across the chamber at something behind Arthur's line of vision. 
"What's this switch?" he cried. 
"What? Where?" cried Arthur twisting round. 
"No, I was only fooling," said Ford, "we are going to die after all." 
He slumped against the wall again and carried on the tune from 
where he left off. 
"You know," said Arthur, "it's at times like this, when I'm trapped in 
a Vogon airlock with a man from Betelgeuse, and about to die of 
asphyxication in deep space that I really wish I'd listened to what my 
mother told me when I was young." 
"Why, what did she tell you?" 
"I don't know, I didn't listen." 
"Oh." Ford carried on humming. 
"This is terrific," Arthur thought to himself, "Nelson's Column has 
gone, McDonald's have gone, all that's left is me and the words 
Mostly Harmless. Any second now all that will be left is Mostly 
Harmless. And yesterday the planet seemed to be going so well." 
A motor whirred. 
A slight hiss built into a deafening roar of rushing air as the outer 
hatchway opened on to an empty blackness studded with tiny 
impossibly bright points of light. Ford and Arthur popped into outer 
space like corks from a toy gun. 
Chapter 8
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a wholly remarkable book. It 
has been compiled and recompiled many times over many years and 
under many different editorships. It contains contributions from 
countless numbers of travellers and researchers. 
The introduction begins like this: 
"Space," it says, "is big. Really big. You just won't believe how vastly 
hugely mindboggingly big it is. I mean you may think it's a long way 
down the road to the chemist, but that's just peanuts to space. 
Listen..." and so on. 
(After a while the style settles down a bit and it begins to tell you 
things you really need to know, like the fact that the fabulously 
beautiful planet Bethselamin is now so worried about the cumulative 
erosion by ten billion visiting tourists a year that any net imbalance 
between the amount you eat and the amount you excrete whilst on 
the planet is surgically removed from your bodyweight when you 
leave: so every time you go to the lavatory it is vitally important to get 
a receipt.) 
To be fair though, when confronted by the sheer enormity of 
distances between the stars, better minds than the one responsible 
for the Guide's introduction have faltered. Some invite you to 
consider for a moment a peanut in reading and a small walnut in 
Johannesburg, and other such dizzying concepts. 
The simple truth is that interstellar distances will not fit into the 
human imagination. 
Even light, which travels so fast that it takes most races thousands 
of years to realize that it travels at all, takes time to journey between 
the stars. It takes eight minutes from the star Sol to the place where 
the Earth used to be, and four years more to arrive at Sol's nearest 
stellar neighbour, Alpha Proxima. 
For light to reach the other side of the Galaxy, for it to reach 
Damogran for instance, takes rather longer: five hundred thousand 
years. 
The record for hitch hiking this distance is just under five years, but 
you don't get to see much on the way. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy says that if you hold a lungful 
of air you can survive in the total vacuum of space for about thirty 
seconds. However it goes on to say that what with space being the 
mind boggling size it is the chances of getting picked up by another 
ship within those thirty seconds are two to the power of two hundred 
and sixty`seven thousand seven hundred and nine to one against. 
By a totally staggering coincidence that is also the telephone 
number of an Islington flat where Arthur once went to a very good 
party and met a very nice girl whom he totally failed to get off with ʹ
she went off with a gatecrasher. 
Though the planet Earth, the Islington flat and the telephone have 
all now been demolished, it is comforting to reflect that they are all in 
some small way commemorated by the fact that twenty`nine seconds 
later Ford and Arthur were rescued. 
Chapter 9
A computer chatted to itself in alarm as it noticed an airlock open 
and close itself for no apparent reason. 
This was because Reason was in fact out to lunch. 
A hole had just appeared in the Galaxy. It was exactly a nothingth 
of a second long, a nothingth of an inch wide, and quite a lot of 
million light years from end to end. 
As it closed up lots of paper hats and party balloons fell out of it 
and drifted off through the universe. A team of seven three`foot`high 
market analysts fell out of it and died, partly of asphyxication, partly 
of surprise. 
Two hundred and thirty`nine thousand lightly fried eggs fell out of 
it too, materializing in a large woobly heap on the famine ʹ struck 
land of Poghril in the Pansel system. 
The whole Poghril tribe had died out from famine except for one 
last man who died of cholesterol poisoning some weeks later. 
The nothingth of a second for which the hole existed reverberated 
backwards and forwards through time in a most improbable fashion. 
Somewhere in the deeply remote past it seriously traumatized a small 
random group of atoms drifting through the empty sterility of space 
and made them cling together in the most extraordinarily unlikely 
patterns. These patterns quickly learnt to copy themselves (this was 
part of what was so extraordinary of the patterns) and went on to 
cause massive trouble on every planet they drifted on to. That was 
how life began in the Universe. 
Five wild Event Maelstroms swirled in vicious storms of unreason 
and spewed up a pavement. 
On the pavement lay Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent gulping like 
half`spent fish. 
"There you are," gasped Ford, scrabbling for a fingerhold on the 
pavement as it raced through the Third Reach of the Unknown, "I told 
you I'd think of something." 
"Oh sure," said Arthur, "sure." 
"Bright idea of mine," said Ford, "to find a passing spaceship and 
get rescued by it." 
The real universe arched sickeningly away beneath them. Various 
pretend ones flitted silently by, like mountain goats. Primal light 
exploded, splattering space`time as with gobbets of junket. Time 
blossomed, matter shrank away. The highest prime number coalesced 
quietly in a corner and hid itself away for ever. 
"Oh come off it," said Arthur, "the chances against it were 
astronomical." 
"Don't knock it, it worked," said Ford. 
"What sort of ship are we in?" asked Arthur as the pit of eternity 
yawned beneath them. 
"I don't know," said Ford, "I haven't opened my eyes yet." 
"No, nor have I," said Arthur. 
The Universe jumped, froze, quivered and splayed out in several 
unexpected directions. 
Arthur and Ford opened their eyes and looked about in 
considerable surprise. 
"Good god," said Arthur, "it looks just like the sea front at 
Southend." 
"Hell, I'm relieved to hear you say that," said Ford. 
"Why?" 
"Because I thought I must be going mad." 
"Perhaps you are. Perhaps you only thought I said it." 
Ford thought about this. 
"Well, did you say it or didn't you?" he asked. 
"I think so," said Arthur. 
"Well, perhaps we're both going mad." 
"Yes," said Arthur, "we'd be mad, all things considered, to think this 
was Southend." 
"Well, do you think this is Southend?" 
"Oh yes." 
"So do I." 
"Therefore we must be mad." 
"Nice day for it." 
"Yes," said a passing maniac. 
"Who was that?" asked Arthur 
"Who ʹ the man with the five heads and the elderberry bush full of 
kippers?" 
"Yes." 
"I don't know. Just someone." 
"Ah." 
They both sat on the pavement and watched with a certain unease 
as huge children bounced heavily along the sand and wild horses 
thundered through the sky taking fresh supplies of reinforced railings 
to the Uncertain Areas. 
"You know," said Arthur with a slight cough, "if this is Southend, 
there's something very odd about it..." 
"You mean the way the sea stays steady and the buildings keep 
washing up and down?" said Ford. "Yes I thought that was odd too. In 
fact," he continued as with a huge bang Southend split itself into six 
equal segments which danced and span giddily round each other in 
lewd and licentious formation, "there is something altogether very 
strange going on." 
Wild yowling noises of pipes and strings seared through the wind, 
hot doughnuts popped out of the road for ten pence each, horrid fish 
stormed out of the sky and Arthur and Ford decided to make a run for 
it. 
They plunged through heavy walls of sound, mountains of archaic 
thought, valleys of mood music, bad shoe sessions and footling bats 
and suddenly heard a girl's voice. 
It sounded quite a sensible voice, but it just said, "Two to the 
power of one hundred thousand to one against and falling," and that 
was all. 
Ford skidded down a beam of light and span round trying to find a 
source for the voice but could see nothing he could seriously believe 
in. 
"What was that voice?" shouted Arthur. 
"I don't know," yelled Ford, "I don't know. It sounded like a 
measurement of probability." 
"Probability? What do you mean?" 
"Probability. You know, like two to one, three to one, five to four 
against. It said two to the power of one hundred thousand to one 
against. That's pretty improbable you know." 
A million`gallon vat of custard upended itself over them without 
warning. 
"But what does it mean?" cried Arthur. 
"What, the custard?" 
"No, the measurement of probability " 
"I don't know. I don't know at all. I think we're on some kind of 
spaceship." 
"I can only assume," said Arthur, "that this is not the first`class 
compartment." 
Bulges appeared in the fabric of space`time. Great ugly bulges. 
"Haaaauuurrgghhh..." said Arthur as he felt his body softening and 
bending in unusual directions. "Southend seems to be melting away... 
the stars are swirling... a dustbowl... my legs are drifting off into the
sunset... my left arm's come off too." A frightening thought struck him: 
"Hell," he said, "how am I going to operate my digital watch now?" He 
wound his eyes desperately around in Ford's direction. 
"Ford," he said, "you're turning into a penguin. Stop it." 
Again came the voice. 
"Two to the power of seventy`five thousand to one against and 
falling." 
Ford waddled around his pond in a furious circle. 
"Hey, who are you," he quacked. "Where are you? What's going on 
and is there any way of stopping it?" 
"Please relax," said the voice pleasantly, like a stewardess in an 
airliner with only one wing and two engines one of which is on fire, 
"you are perfectly safe." 
"But that's not the point " raged Ford. "The point is that I am now a 
perfectly save penguin, and my colleague here is rapidly running out 
of limbs " 
"It's alright, I've got them back now," said Arthur. 
"Two to the power of fifty thousand to one against and falling," 
said the voice. 
"Admittedly," said Arthur, "they're longer than I usually like them, 
but..." 
"Isn't there anything," squawked Ford in avian fury, "you feel you 
ought to be telling us?" 
The voice cleared its throat. A giant petit four lolloped off into the 
distance. 
"Welcome," the voice said, "to the Starship Heart of Gold." 
The voice continued. 
"Please do not be alarmed," it said, "by anything you see or hear 
around you. You are bound to feel some initial ill effects as you have 
been rescued from certain death at an improbability level of two to 
the power of two hundred and seventy`six thousand to one against ʹ
possibly much higher. We are now cruising at a level of two to the 
power of twenty`five thousand to one against and falling, and we will 
be restoring normality just as soon as we are sure what is normal 
anyway. Thank you. Two to the power of twenty thousand to one 
against and falling." 
The voice cut out. 
Ford and Arthur were in a small luminous pink cubicle. 
Ford was wildly excited. 
"Arthur " he said, "this is fantastic  We've been picked up by a ship 
powered by the Infinite Improbability Drive  This is incredible  I heard 
rumors about it before  They were all officially denied, but they must 
have done it  They've built the Improbability Drive  Arthur, this is... 
Arthur? What's happening?" 
Arthur had jammed himself against the door to the cubicle, trying 
to hold it closed, but it was ill fitting. Tiny furry little hands were 
squeezing themselves through the cracks, their fingers were 
inkstained; tiny voices chattered insanely. 
Arthur looked up. 
"Ford " he said, "there's an infinite number of monkeys outside 
who want to talk to us about this script for Hamlet they've worked 
out." 
Chapter 10
The Infinite Improbability Drive is a wonderful new method of 
crossing vast interstellar distances in a mere nothingth of a second, 
without all that tedious mucking about in hyperspace. 
It was discovered by a lucky chance, and then developed into a 
governable form of propulsion by the Galactic Government's research 
team on Damogran. 
This, briefly, is the story of its discovery. 
The principle of generating small amounts of finite improbability by 
simply hooking the logic circuits of a Bambleweeny 57 Sub`Meson 
Brain to an atomic vector plotter suspended in a strong Brownian 
Motion producer (say a nice hot cup of tea) were of course well 
understood ʹ and such generators were often used to break the ice at 
parties by making all the molecules in the hostess's undergarments 
leap simultaneously one foot to the left, in accordance with the 
Theory of Indeterminacy. 
Many respectable physicists said that they weren't going to stand 
for this ʹ partly because it was a debasement of science, but mostly 
because they didn't get invited to those sort of parties. 
Another thing they couldn't stand was the perpetual failure they 
encountered in trying to construct a machine which could generate 
the infinite improbability field needed to flip a spaceship across the 
mind`paralysing distances between the furthest stars, and in the end 
they grumpily announced that such a machine was virtually 
impossible. 
Then, one day, a student who had been left to sweep up the lab 
after a particularly unsuccessful party found himself reasoning this 
way: 
If, he thought to himself, such a machine is a virtual impossibility, 
then it must logically be a finite improbability. So all I have to do in 
order to make one is to work out exactly how improbable it is, feed 
that figure into the finite improbability generator, give it a fresh cup 
of really hot tea... and turn it on  
He did this, and was rather startled to discover that he had 
managed to create the long sought after golden Infinite Improbability 
generator out of thin air. 
It startled him even more when just after he was awarded the 
Galactic Institute's Prize for Extreme Cleverness he got lynched by a 
rampaging mob of respectable physicists who had finally realized that 
the one thing they really couldn't stand was a smartass. 
Chapter 11
The Improbability`proof control cabin of the Heart of Gold looked 
like a perfectly conventional spaceship except that it was perfectly 
clean because it was so new. Some of the control seats hadn't had the 
plastic wrapping taken off yet. The cabin was mostly white, oblong, 
and about the size of a smallish restaurant. In fact it wasn't perfectly 
oblong: the two long walls were raked round in a slight parallel curve, 
and all the angles and corners were contoured in excitingly chunky 
shapes. The truth of the matter is that it would have been a great deal 
simpler and more practical to build the cabin as an ordinary three`
dimensional oblong rom, but then the designers would have got 
miserable. As it was the cabin looked excitingly purposeful, with large 
video screens ranged over the control and guidance system panels on 
the concave wall, and long banks of computers set into the convex 
wall. In one corner a robot sat humped, its gleaming brushed steel 
head hanging loosely between its gleaming brushed steel knees. It too 
was fairly new, but though it was beautifully constructed and polished 
it somehow looked as if the various parts of its more or less humanoid 
body didn't quite fit properly. In fact they fitted perfectly well, but 
something in its bearing suggested that they might have fitted better. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox paced nervously up and down the cabin, 
brushing his hands over pieces of gleaming equipment and giggling 
with excitement. 
Trillian sat hunched over a clump of instruments reading off figures. 
Her voice was carried round the Tannoy system of the whole ship. 
"Five to one against and falling..." she said, "four to one against and 
falling... three to one... two... one... probability factor of one to one... 
we have normality, I repeat we have normality." She turned her 
microphone off ʹ then turned it back on, with a slight smile and 
continued: "Anything you still can't cope with is therefore your own 
problem. Please relax. You will be sent for soon." 
Zaphod burst out in annoyance: "Who are they Trillian?" 
Trillian span her seat round to face him and shrugged. 
"Just a couple of guys we seem to have picked up in open space," 
she said. "Section ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha." 
"Yeah, well that's a very sweet thought Trillian," complained 
Zaphod, "but do you really think it's wise under the circumstances? I 
mean, here we are on the run and everything, we must have the 
police of half the Galaxy after us by now, and we stop to pick up 
hitchhikers. OK, so ten out of ten for style, but minus several million 
for good thinking, yeah?" 
He tapped irritably at a control panel. Trillian quietly moved his 
hand before he tapped anything important. Whatever Zaphod's 
qualities of mind might include ʹ dash, bravado, conceit ʹ he was 
mechanically inept and could easily blow the ship up with an 
extravagant gesture. Trillian had come to suspect that the main 
reason why he had had such a wild and successful life that he never 
really understood the significance of anything he did. 
"Zaphod," she said patiently, "they were floating unprotected in 
open space... you wouldn't want them to have died would you?" 
"Well, you know... no. Not as such, but..." 
"Not as such? Not die as such? But?" Trillian cocked her head on 
one side. 
"Well, maybe someone else might have picked them up later." 
"A second later and they would have been dead." 
"Yeah, so if you'd taken the trouble to think about the problem a 
bit longer it would have gone away." 
"You'd been happy to let them die?" 
"Well, you know, not happy as such, but..." 
"Anyway," said Trillian, turning back to the controls, "I didn't pick 
them up." 
"What do you mean? Who picked them up then?" 
"The ship did." 
"Huh?" 
"The ship did. All by itself." 
"Huh?" 
"Whilst we were in Improbability Drive." 
"But that's incredible." 
"No Zaphod. Just very very improbable." 
"Er, yeah." 
"Look Zaphod," she said, patting his arm, "don't worry about the 
aliens. They're just a couple of guys I expect. I'll send the robot down 
to get them and bring them up here. Hey Marvin " 
In the corner, the robot's head swung up sharply, but then 
wobbled about imperceptibly. It pulled itself up to its feet as if it was 
about five pounds heavier that it actually was, and made what an 
outside observer would have thought was a heroic effort to cross the 
room. It stopped in front of Trillian and seemed to stare through her 
left shoulder. 
"I think you ought to know I'm feeling very depressed," it said. Its 
voice was low and hopeless. 
"Oh God," muttered Zaphod and slumped into a seat. 
"Well," said Trillian in a bright compassionate tone, "here's 
something to occupy you and keep your mind off things." 
"It won't work," droned Marvin, "I have an exceptionally large 
mind." 
"Marvin " warned Trillian. 
"Alright," said Marvin, "what do you want me to do?" 
"Go down to number two entry bay and bring the two aliens up 
here under surveillance." 
With a microsecond pause, and a finely calculated 
micromodulation of pitch and timbre ʹ nothing you could actually 
take offence at ʹ Marvin managed to convey his utter contempt and 
horror of all things human. 
"Just that?" he said. 
"Yes," said Trillian firmly. 
"I won't enjoy it," said Marvin. 
Zaphod leaped out of his seat. 
"She's not asking you to enjoy it," he shouted, "just do it will you?" 
"Alright," said Marvin like the tolling of a great cracked bell, "I'll do 
it." 
"Good..." snapped Zaphod, "great... thank you..." 
Marvin turned and lifted his flat`topped triangular red eyes up 
towards him. 
"I'm not getting you down at all am I?" he said pathetically. 
"No no Marvin," lilted Trillian, "that's just fine, really..." 
"I wouldn't like to think that I was getting you down." 
"No, don't worry about that," the lilt continued, "you just act as 
comes naturally and everything will be just fine." 
"You're sure you don't mind?" probed Marvin. 
"No no Marvin," lilted Trillian, "that's just fine, really... just part of 
life." 
"Marvin flashed him an electronic look. 
"Life," said Marvin, "don't talk to me about life." 
He turned hopelessly on his heel and lugged himself out of the 
cabin. With a satisfied hum and a click the door closed behind him 
"I don't think I can stand that robot much longer Zaphod," growled 
Trillian. 
The Encyclopaedia Galactica defines a robot as a mechanical 
apparatus designed to do the work of a man. The marketing division 
of the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation defines a robot as "Your Plastic 
Pal Who's Fun To Be With." 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy defines the marketing division 
of the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation as "a bunch of mindless jerks 
who'll be the first against the wall when the revolution comes," with a 
footnote to the effect that the editors would welcome applications 
from anyone interested in taking over the post of robotics 
correspondent. 
Curiously enough, an edition of the Encyclopaedia Galactica that 
had the good fortune to fall through a time warp from a thousand 
years in the future defined the marketing division of the Sirius 
Cybernetics Corporation as "a bunch of mindless jerks who were the 
first against the wall when the revolution came." 
The pink cubicle had winked out of existence, the monkeys had 
sunk away to a better dimension. Ford and Arthur found themselves 
in the embarkation area of the ship. It was rather smart. 
"I think the ship's brand new," said Ford. 
"How can you tell?" asked Arthur. "Have you got some exotic 
device for measuring the age of metal?" 
"No, I just found this sales brochure lying on the floor. It's a lot of 
'the Universe can be yours' stuff. Ah  Look, I was right." 
Ford jabbed at one of the pages and showed it to Arthur. 
"It says: 'Sensational new breakthrough in Improbability Physics. As 
soon as the ship's drive reaches Infinite Improbability it passes 
through every point in the Universe. Be the envy of other major 
governments.' Wow, this is big league stuff." 
Ford hunted excitedly through the technical specs of the ship, 
occasionally gasping with astonishment at what he read ʹ clearly 
Galactic astrotechnology had moved ahead during the years of his 
exile. 
Arthur listened for a short while, but being unable to understand 
the vast majority of what Ford was saying he began to let his mind 
wander, trailing his fingers along the edge of an incomprehensible 
computer bank, he reached out and pressed an invitingly large red 
button on a nearby panel. The panel lit up with the words Please do 
not press this button again. He shook himself. 
"Listen," said Ford, who was still engrossed in the sales brochure, 
"they make a big thing of the ship's cybernetics. 'A new generation of 
Sirius Cybernetics Corporation robots and computers, with the new 
GPP feature.'" 
"GPP feature?" said Arthur. "What's that?" 
"Oh, it says Genuine People Personalities." 
"Oh," said Arthur, "sounds ghastly." 
A voice behind them said, "It is." The voice was low and hopeless 
and accompanied by a slight clanking sound. They span round and 
saw an abject steel man standing hunched in the doorway. 
"What?" they said. 
"Ghastly," continued Marvin, "it all is. Absolutely ghastly. Just don't 
even talk about it. Look at this door," he said, stepping through it. The 
irony circuits cut into his voice modulator as he mimicked the style of 
the sales brochure. "All the doors in this spaceship have a cheerful 
and sunny disposition. It is their pleasure to open for you, and their 
satisfaction to close again with the knowledge of a job well done." 
As the door closed behind them it became apparent that it did 
indeed have a satisfied sigh`like quality to it. 
"Hummmmmmmyummmmmmm ah " it said. 
Marvin regarded it with cold loathing whilst his logic circuits 
chattered with disgust and tinkered with the concept of directing 
physical violence against it Further circuits cut in saying, Why bother? 
What's the point? Nothing is worth getting involved in. Further 
circuits amused themselves by analysing the molecular components 
of the door, and of the humanoids' brain cells. For a quick encore they 
measured the level of hydrogen emissions in the surrounding cubic 
parsec of space and then shut down again in boredom. A spasm of 
despair shook the robot's body as he turned. 
"Come on," he droned, "I've been ordered to take you down to the 
bridge. Here I am, brain the size of a planet and they ask me to take 
you down to the bridge. Call that job satisfaction? 'Cos I don't." 
He turned and walked back to the hated door. 
"Er, excuse me," said Ford following after him, "which government 
owns this ship?" 
Marvin ignored him. 
"You watch this door," he muttered, "it's about to open again. I can 
tell by the intolerable air of smugness it suddenly generates." 
With an ingratiating little whine the door slit open again and 
Marvin stomped through. 
"Come on," he said. 
The others followed quickly and the door slit back into place with 
pleased little clicks and whirrs. 
"Thank you the marketing division of the Sirius Cybernetics 
Corporation," said Marvin and trudged desolately up the gleaming 
curved corridor that stretched out before them. "Let's build robots 
with Genuine People Personalities," they said. So they tried it out with 
me. I'm a personality prototype. You can tell can't you?" 
Ford and Arthur muttered embarrassed little disclaimers. 
"I hate that door," continued Marvin. "I'm not getting you down at 
all am I?" 
"Which government..." started Ford again. 
"No government owns it," snapped the robot, "it's been stolen." 
"Stolen?" 
"Stolen?" mimicked Marvin. 
"Who by?" asked Ford. 
"Zaphod Beeblebrox." 
Something extraordinary happened to Ford's face. At least five 
entirely separate and distinct expressions of shock and amazement 
piled up on it in a jumbled mess. His left leg, which was in mid stride, 
seemed to have difficulty in finding the floor again. He stared at the 
robot and tried to entangle some dartoid muscles. 
"Zaphod Beeblebrox...?" he said weakly. 
"Sorry, did I say something wrong?" said Marvin, dragging himself 
on regardless. "Pardon me for breathing, which I never do anyway so I 
don't know why I bother to say it, oh God I'm so depressed. Here's 
another of those self`satisfied door. Life  Don't talk to me about life." 
"No one ever mentioned it," muttered Arthur irritably. "Ford, are 
you alright?" 
Ford stared at him. "Did that robot say Zaphod Beeblebrox?" he 
said. 
Chapter 12
A loud clatter of gunk music flooded through the Heart of Gold 
cabin as Zaphod searched the sub`etha radio wavebands for news of 
himself. The machine was rather difficult to operate. For years radios 
had been operated by means of pressing buttons and turning dials; 
then as the technology became more sophisticated the controls were 
made touch`sensitive`you merely had to brush the panels with your 
fingers; now all you had to do was wave your hand in the general 
direction of the components and hope. It saved a lot of muscular 
expenditure of course, but meant that you had to sit infuriatingly still 
if you wanted to keep listening to the same programme. 
Zaphod waved a hand and the channel switched again. More gunk 
music, but this time it was a background to a news announcement. 
The news was always heavily edited to fit the rhythms of the music. 
"... and news brought to you here on the sub`etha wave band, 
broadcasting around the galaxy around the clock," squawked a voice, 
"and we'll be saying a big hello to all intelligent life forms 
everywhere... and to everyone else out there, the secret is to bang 
the rocks together, guys. And of course, the big news story tonight is 
the sensational theft of the new Improbability Drive prototype ship by 
none other than Galactic President Zaphod Beeblebrox. And the 
question everyone's asking is... has the big Z finally flipped? 
Beeblebrox, the man who invented the Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster, 
ex`confidence trickster, once described by Eccentrica Gallumbits as 
the Best Bang since the Big One, and recently voted the Worst 
Dressed Sentinent Being in the Known Universe for the seventh time... 
has he got an answer this time? We asked his private brain care 
specialist Gag Halfrunt..." 
The music swirled and dived for a moment. Another voice broke in, 
presumably Halfrunt. He said: "Well, Zaphod's jist zis guy you know?" 
but got no further because an electric pencil flew across the cabin and 
through the radio's on/off sensitive airspace. Zaphod turned and 
glared at Trillian ʹ she had thrown the pencil. 
"Hey," he said, what do you do that for?" 
Trillian was tapping her fingers on a screenful of figures. 
"I've just thought of something," she said. 
"Yeah? Worth interrupting a news bulletin about me for?" 
"You hear enough about yourself as it is." 
"I'm very insecure. We know that." 
"Can we drop your ego for a moment? This is important." 
"If there's anything more important than my ego around, I want it 
caught and shot now." Zaphod glared at her again, then laughed. 
"Listen," she said, "we picked up those couple of guys..." 
"What couple of guys?" 
"The couple of guys we picked up." 
"Oh, yeah," said Zaphod, "those couple of guys." 
"We picked them up in sector ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha." 
"Yeah?" said Zaphod and blinked. 
Trillian said quietly, "Does that mean anything to you?" 
"Mmmmm," said Zaphod, "ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha. ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha?" 
"Well?" said Trillian. 
"Er... what does the Z mean?" said Zaphod. 
"Which one?" 
"Any one." 
One of the major difficulties Trillian experienced in her relationship 
with Zaphod was learning to distinguish between him pretending to 
be stupid just to get people off their guard, pretending to be stupid 
because he couldn't be bothered to think and wanted someone else 
to do it for him, pretending to be outrageously stupid to hide the fact 
that he actually didn't understand what was going on, and really being 
genuinely stupid. He was renowned for being amazingly clever and 
quite clearly was so ʹ but not all the time, which obviously worried 
him, hence the act. He proffered people to be puzzled rather than 
contemptuous. This above all appeared to Trillian to be genuinely 
stupid, but she could no longer be bothered to argue about it. 
She sighed and punched up a star map on the visiscreen so she 
could make it simple for him, whatever his reasons for wanting it to 
be that way. 
"There," she pointed, "right there." 
"Hey... Yeah " said Zaphod. 
"Well?" she said. 
"Well what?" 
Parts of the inside of her head screamed at other parts of the 
inside of her head. She said, very calmly, "It's the same sector you 
originally picked me up in." 
He looked at her and then looked back at the screen. 
"Hey, yeah," he said, "now that is wild. We should have zapped 
straight into the middle of the Horsehead Nebula. How did we come 
to be there? I mean that's nowhere." 
She ignored this. 
"Improbability Drive," she said patiently. "You explained it to me 
yourself. We pass through every point in the Universe, you know 
that." 
"Yeah, but that's one wild coincidence isn't it?" 
"Yes." 
"Picking someone up at that point? Out of the whole of the 
Universe to choose from? That's just too... I want to work this out. 
Computer " 
The Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Shipboard Computer which 
controlled and permeated every particle of the ship switched into 
communication mode. 
"Hi there " it said brightly and simultaneously spewed out a tiny 
ribbon of ticker tape just for the record. The ticker tape said, Hi there  
"Oh God," said Zaphod. He hadn't worked with this computer for 
long but had already learned to loathe it. 
The computer continued, brash and cheery as if it was selling 
detergent. 
"I want you to know that whatever your problem, I am here to help 
you solve it." 
"Yeah yeah," said Zaphod. "Look, I think I'll just use a piece of 
paper." 
"Sure thing," said the computer, spilling out its message into a 
waste bin at the same time, "I understand. If you ever want..." 
"Shut up " said Zaphod, and snatching up a pencil sat down next to 
Trillian at the console. 
"OK, OK..." said the computer in a hurt tone of voice and closed 
down its speech channel again. 
Zaphod and Trillian pored over the figures that the Improbability
flight path scanner flashed silently up in front of them. 
"Can we work out," said Zaphod, "from their point of view what the 
Improbability of their rescue was?" 
"Yes, that's a constant", said Trillian, "two to the power of two 
hundred and seventy`six thousand seven hundred and nine to one 
against." 
"That's high. They're two lucky lucky guys." 
"Yes." 
"But relative to what we were doing when the ship picked them 
up..." 
Trillian punched up the figures. They showed two`to`the power`of`
Infinity`minus`one (an irrational number that only has a conventional 
meaning in Improbability physics). 
"... it's pretty low," continued Zaphod with a slight whistle. 
"Yes," agreed Trillian, and looked at him quizzically. 
"That's one big whack of Improbability to be accounted for. 
Something pretty improbable has got to show up on the balance 
sheet if it's all going to add up into a pretty sum." 
Zaphod scribbled a few sums, crossed them out and threw the 
pencil away. 
"Bat's dots, I can't work it out." 
"Well?" 
Zaphod knocked his two heads together in irritation and gritted his 
teeth. 
"OK," he said. "Computer " 
The voice circuits sprang to life again. 
"Why hello there " they said (ticker tape, ticker tape). "All I want to 
do is make your day nicer and nicer and nicer..." 
"Yeah well shut up and work something out for me." 
"Sure thing," chattered the computer, "you want a probability 
forecast based on..." 
"Improbability data, yeah." 
"OK," the computer continued. "Here's an interesting little notion. 
Did you realize that most people's lives are governed by telephone 
numbers?" 
A pained look crawled across one of Zaphod's faces and on to the 
other one. 
"Have you flipped?" he said. 
"No, but you will when I tell you that..." 
Trillian gasped. She scrabbled at the buttons on the Improbability 
flight path screen. 
"Telephone number?" she said. "Did that thing say telephone 
number?" 
Numbers flashed up on the screen. 
The computer had paused politely, but now it continued. 
"What I was about to say was that..." 
"Don't bother please," said Trillian. 
"Look, what is this?" said Zaphod. 
"I don't know," said Trillian, "but those aliens ʹ they're on the way 
up to the bridge with that wretched robot. Can we pick them up on 
any monitor cameras?" 
Chapter 13
Marvin trudged on down the corridor, still moaning. 
"... and then of course I've got this terrible pain in all the diodes 
down my left hand side..." 
"No?" said Arthur grimly as he walked along beside him. "Really?" 
"Oh yes," said Marvin, "I mean I've asked for them to be replaced 
but no one ever listens." 
"I can imagine." 
Vague whistling and humming noises were coming from Ford. 
"Well well well," he kept saying to himself, "Zaphod Beeblebrox..." 
Suddenly Marvin stopped, and held up a hand. 
"You know what's happened now of course?" 
"No, what?" said Arthur, who didn't what to know. 
"We've arrived at another of those doors." 
There was a sliding door let into the side of the corridor. Marvin 
eyed it suspiciously. 
"Well?" said Ford impatiently. "Do we go through?" 
"Do we go through?" mimicked Marvin. "Yes. This is the entrance 
to the bridge. I was told to take you to the bridge. Probably the 
highest demand that will be made on my intellectual capacities today 
I shouldn't wonder." 
Slowly, with great loathing, he stepped towards the door, like a 
hunter stalking his prey. Suddenly it slid open. 
"Thank you," it said, "for making a simple door very happy." 
Deep in Marvin's thorax gears ground. 
"Funny," he intoned funerally, "how just when you think life can't 
possibly get any worse it suddenly does." 
He heaved himself through the door and left Ford and Arthur 
staring at each other and shrugging their shoulders. From inside they 
heard Marvin's voice again. 
"I suppose you want to see the aliens now," he said. "Do you want 
me to sit in a corner and rust, or just fall apart where I'm standing?" 
"Yeah, just show them in would you Marvin?" came another voice. 
Arthur looked at Ford and was astonished to see him laughing. 
"What's...?" 
"Shhh," said Ford, "come in." 
He stepped through into the bridge. 
Arthur followed him in nervously and was astonished to see a man 
lolling back in a chair with his feet on a control console picking the 
teeth in his right`hand head with his left hand. The right`hand head 
seemed to be thoroughly preoccupied with this task, but the left`hand 
one was grinning a broad, relaxed, nonchalant grin. The number of 
things that Arthur couldn't believe he was seeing was fairly large. His 
jaw flapped about at a loose end for a while. 
The peculiar man waved a lazy wave at Ford and with an appalling 
affectation of nonchalance said, "Ford, hi, how are you? Glad you 
could drop in." 
Ford was not going to be outcooled. 
"Zaphod," he drawled, "great to see you, you're looking well, the 
extra arm suits you. Nice ship you've stolen." 
Arthur goggled at him. 
"You mean you know this guy?" he said, waving a wild finger at 
Zaphod. 
"Know him " exclaimed Ford, "he's..." he paused, and decided to 
do the introductions the other way round. 
"Oh, Zaphod, this is a friend of mine, Arthur Dent," he said, "I saved 
him when his planet blew up." 
"Oh sure," said Zaphod, "hi Arthur, glad you could make it." His 
right`hand head looked round casually, said "hi" and went back to 
having his teeth picked. 
Ford carried on. "And Arthur," he said, "this is my semi`cousin 
Zaphod Beeb..." 
"We've met," said Arthur sharply. 
When you're cruising down the road in the fast lane and you lazily 
sail past a few hard driving cars and are feeling pretty pleased with 
yourself and then accidentally change down from fourth to first 
instead of third thus making your engine leap out of your bonnet in a 
rather ugly mess, it tends to throw you off your stride in much the 
same way that this remark threw Ford Prefect off his. 
"Err... what?" 
"I said we've met." 
Zaphod gave an awkward start of surprise and jabbed a gum 
sharply. 
"Hey... er, have we? Hey... er..." 
Ford rounded on Arthur with an angry flash in his eyes. Now he felt 
he was back on home ground he suddenly began to resent having 
lumbered himself with this ignorant primitive who knew as much 
about the affairs of the Galaxy as an Ilford`based gnat knew about life 
in Peking. 
"What do you mean you've met?" he demanded. "This is Zaphod 
Beeblebrox from Betelgeuse Five you know, not bloody Martin Smith 
from Croydon." 
"I don't care," said Arthur coldly. We've met, haven't we Zaphod 
Beeblebrox ʹ or should I say... Phil?" 
"What " shouted Ford. 
"You'll have to remind me," said Zaphod. "I've a terrible memory 
for species." 
"It was at a party," pursued Arthur. 
"Yeah, well I doubt that," said Zaphod. 
"Cool it will you Arthur " demanded Ford. 
Arthur would not be deterred. "A party six months ago. On Earth... 
England..." 
Zaphod shook his head with a tight`lipped smile. 
"London," insisted Arthur, "Islington." 
"Oh," said Zaphod with a guilty start, "that party." 
This wasn't fair on Ford at all. He looked backwards and forwards 
between Arthur and Zaphod. "What?" he said to Zaphod. "You don't 
mean to say you've been on that miserable planet as well do you?" 
"No, of course not," said Zaphod breezily. "Well, I may have just 
dropped in briefly, you know, on my way somewhere..." 
"But I was stuck there for fifteen years " 
"Well I didn't know that did I?" 
"But what were you doing there?" 
"Looking about, you know." 
"He gatecrashed a party," persisted Arthur, trembling with anger, 
"a fancy dress party..." 
"It would have to be, wouldn't it?" said Ford. 
"At this party," persisted Arthur, "was a girl... oh well, look it 
doesn't matter now. The whole place has gone up in smoke 
anyway..." 
"I wish you'd stop sulking about that bloody planet," said Ford. 
"Who was the lady?" 
"Oh just somebody. Well alright, I wasn't doing very well with her. 
I'd been trying all evening. Hell, she was something though. Beautiful, 
charming, devastatingly intelligent, at last I'd got her to myself for a 
bit and was plying her with a bit of talk when this friend of yours 
barges up and says Hey doll, is this guy boring you? Why don't you 
talk to me instead? I'm from a different planet." I never saw her 
again." 
"Zaphod?" exclaimed Ford. 
"Yes," said Arthur, glaring at him and trying not to feel foolish. "He 
only had the two arms and the one head and he called himself Phil, 
but..." 
"But you must admit he did turn out to be from another planet," 
said Trillian wandering into sight at the other end of the bridge. She 
gave Arthur a pleasant smile which settled on him like a ton of bricks 
and then turned her attention to the ship's controls again. 
There was silence for a few seconds, and then out of the scrambled 
mess of Arthur's brain crawled some words. 
"Tricia McMillian?" he said. "What are you doing here?" 
"Same as you," she said, "I hitched a lift. After all with a degree in 
Maths and another in astrophysics what else was there to do? It was 
either that or the dole queue again on Monday." 
"Infinity minus one," chattered the computer, "Improbability sum 
now complete." 
Zaphod looked about him, at Ford, at Arthur, and then at Trillian. 
"Trillian," he said, "is this sort of thing going to happen every time 
we use the Improbability drive?" 
"Very probably, I'm afraid," she said. 
Chapter 14
The Heart of Gold fled on silently through the night of space, now 
on conventional photon drive. Its crew of four were ill at ease 
knowing that they had been brought together not of their own 
volition or by simple coincidence, but by some curious principle of 
physics ʹ as if relationships between people were susceptible to the 
same laws that governed the relationships between atoms and 
molecules. 
As the ship's artificial night closed in they were each grateful to 
retire to separate cabins and try to rationalize their thoughts. 
Trillian couldn't sleep. She sat on a couch and stared at a small cage 
which contained her last and only links with Earth ʹ two white mice 
that she had insisted Zaphod let her bring. She had expected not to 
see the planet again, but she was disturbed by her negative reaction 
to the planet's destruction. It seemed remote and unreal and she 
could find no thoughts to think about it. She watched the mice 
scurrying round the cage and running furiously in their little plastic 
treadwheels till they occupied her whole attention. Suddenly she 
shook herself and went back to the bridge to watch over the tiny 
flashing lights and figures that charted the ship's progress through the 
void. She wished she knew what it was she was trying not to think 
about. 
Zaphod couldn't sleep. He also wished he knew what it was that he 
wouldn't let himself think about. For as long as he could remember 
he'd suffered from a vague nagging feeling of being not all there. 
Most of the time he was able to put this thought aside and not worry 
about it, but it had been re`awakened by the sudden inexplicable 
arrival of Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent. Somehow it seemed to 
conform to a pattern that he couldn't see. 
Ford couldn't sleep. He was too excited about being back on the 
road again. Fifteen years of virtual imprisonment were over, just as he 
was finally beginning to give up hope. Knocking about with Zaphod for 
a bit promised to be a lot of fun, though there seemed to be 
something faintly odd about his semi`cousin that he couldn't put his 
finger on. The fact that he had become President of the Galaxy was 
frankly astonishing, as was the manner of his leaving the post. Was 
there a reason behind it? There would be no point in asking Zaphod, 
he never appeared to have a reason for anything he did at all: he had 
turned unfathomably into an art form. He attacked everything in life 
with a mixture of extraordinary genius and naive incompetence and it 
was often difficult to tell which was which. 
Arthur slept: he was terribly tired. 
There was a tap at Zaphod's door. It slid open. 
"Zaphod...?" 
"Yeah?" 
"I think we just found what you came to look for." 
"Hey, yeah?" 
Ford gave up the attempt to sleep. In the corner of his cabin was a 
small computer screen and keyboard. He sat at it for a while and tried 
to compose a new entry for the Guide on the subject of Vogons but 
couldn't think of anything vitriolic enough so he gave that up too, 
wrapped a robe round himself and went for a walk to the bridge. 
As he entered he was surprised to see two figures hunched 
excitedly over the instruments. 
"See? The ship's about to move into orbit," Trillian was saying. 
"There's a planet out there. It's at the exact coordinates you 
predicted." 
Zaphod heard a noise and looked up. 
"Ford " he hissed. "Hey, come and take a look at this." 
Ford went and had a look at it. It was a series of figures flashing 
over a screen. 
"You recognize those Galactic coordinates?" said Zaphod. 
"No." 
"I'll give you a clue. Computer " 
"Hi gang " enthused the computer. "This is getting real sociable 
isn't it?" 
"Shut up," said Zaphod, "and show up the screens." 
Light on the bridge sank. Pinpoints of light played across the 
consoles and reflected in four pairs of eyes that stared up at the 
external monitor screens. 
There was absolutely nothing on them. 
"Recognize that?" whispered Zaphod. 
Ford frowned. 
"Er, no," he said. 
"What do you see?" 
"Nothing." 
"Recognize it?" 
"What are you talking about?" 
"We're in the Horsehead Nebula. One whole vast dark cloud." 
"And I was meant to recognize that from a blank screen?" 
"Inside a dark nebula is the only place in the Galaxy you'd see a 
dark screen." 
"Very good." 
Zaphod laughed. He was clearly very excited about something, 
almost childishly so. 
"Hey, this is really terrific, this is just far too much " 
"What's so great about being stuck in a dust cloud?" said Ford. 
"What would you reckon to find here?" urged Zaphod. 
"Nothing." 
"No stars? No planets?" 
"No." 
"Computer " shouted Zaphod, "rotate angle of vision through one`
eighty degrees and don't talk about it " 
For a moment it seemed that nothing was happening, then a 
brightness glowed at the edge of the huge screen. A red star the size 
of a small plate crept across it followed quickly by another one ʹ a 
binary system. Then a vast crescent sliced into the corner of the 
picture ʹ a red glare shading away into the deep black, the night side 
of the planet. 
"I've found it " cried Zaphod, thumping the console. "I've found it " 
Ford stared at it in astonishment. 
"What is it?" he said. 
"That..." said Zaphod, "is the most improbable planet that ever 
existed." 
Chapter 15
(Excerpt from The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, Page 634784, 
Section 5a, Entry: Magrathea) 
Far back in the mists of ancient time, in the great and glorious days 
of the former Galactic Empire, life was wild, rich and largely tax free. 
Mighty starships plied their way between exotic suns, seeking 
adventure and reward amongst the furthest reaches of Galactic space. 
In those days spirits were brave, the stakes were high, men were real 
men, women were real women, and small furry creatures from Alpha 
Centauri were real small furry creatures from Alpha Centauri. And all 
dared to brave unknown terrors, to do mighty deeds, to boldly split 
infinitives that no man had split before ʹ and thus was the Empire 
forged. 
Many men of course became extremely rich, but this was perfectly 
natural and nothing to be ashamed of because no one was really poor
ʹ at least no one worth speaking of. And for all the richest and most 
successful merchants life inevitably became rather dull and niggly, 
and they began to imagine that this was therefore the fault of the 
worlds they'd settled on ʹ none of them was entirely satisfactory: 
either the climate wasn't quite right in the later part of the afternoon, 
or the day was half an hour too long, or the sea was exactly the wrong 
shade of pink. 
And thus were created the conditions for a staggering new form of 
specialist industry: custom`made luxury planet building. The home of 
this industry was the planet Magrathea, where hyperspatial engineers 
sucked matter through white holes in space to form it into dream 
planets ʹ gold planets, platinum planets, soft rubber planets with lots 
of earthquakes ʹ all lovingly made to meet the exacting standards 
that the Galaxy's richest men naturally came to expect. 
But so successful was this venture that Magrathea itself soon 
became the richest planet of all time and the rest of the Galaxy was 
reduced to abject poverty. And so the system broke down, the Empire 
collapsed, and a long sullen silence settled over a billion worlds, 
disturbed only by the pen scratchings of scholars as they laboured 
into the night over smug little treaties on the value of a planned 
political economy. 
Magrathea itself disappeared and its memory soon passed into the 
obscurity of legend. 
In these enlightened days of course, no one believes a word of it. 
Chapter 16
Arthur awoke to the sound of argument and went to the bridge. 
Ford was waving his arms about. 
"You're crazy, Zaphod," he was saying, "Magrathea is a myth, a 
fairy story, it's what parents tell their kids about at night if they want 
them to grow up to become economists, it's..." 
"And that's what we are currently in orbit around," insisted Zaphod. 
"Look, I can't help what you may personally be in orbit around," 
said Ford, "but this ship..." 
"Computer " shouted Zaphod. 
"Oh no..." 
"Hi there  This is Eddie your shipboard computer, and I'm feeling 
just great guys, and I know I'm just going to get a bundle of kicks out 
of any programme you care to run through me." 
Arthur looked inquiringly at Trillian. She motioned him to come on 
in but keep quiet. 
"Computer," said Zaphod, "tell us again what our present trajectory 
is." 
"A real pleasure feller," it burbled, "we are currently in orbit at an 
altitude of three hundred miles around the legendary planet of 
Magrathea." 
"Proving nothing," said Ford. "I wouldn't trust that computer to 
speak my weight." 
"I can do that for you, sure," enthused the computer, punching out 
more tickertape. "I can even work out you personality problems to 
ten decimal places if it will help." 
Trillian interrupted. 
"Zaphod," she said, "any minute now we will be swinging round to 
the daylight side of this planet," adding, "whatever it turns out to be." 
"Hey, what do you mean by that? The planet's where I predicted it 
would be isn't it?" 
"Yes, I know there's a planet there. I'm not arguing with anyone, 
it's just that I wouldn't know Magrathea from any other lump of cold 
rock. Dawn's coming up if you want it." 
"OK, OK," muttered Zaphod, "let's at least give our eyes a good 
time. Computer " 
"Hi there  What can I..." 
"Just shut up and give us a view of the planet again." 
A dark featureless mass once more filled the screens ʹ the planet 
rolling away beneath them. 
They watched for a moment in silence, but Zaphod was fidgety 
with excitement. 
"We are now traversing the night side..." he said in a hushed voice. 
The planet rolled on. 
"The surface of the planet is now three hundred miles beneath 
us..." he continued. He was trying to restore a sense of occasion to 
what he felt should have been a great moment. Magrathea  He was 
piqued by Ford's sceptical reaction. Magrathea  
"In a few seconds," he continued, "we should see... there " 
The moment carried itself. Even the most seasoned star tramp 
can't help but shiver at the spectacular drama of a sunrise seen from 
space, but a binary sunrise is one of the marvels of the Galaxy. 
Out of the utter blackness stabbed a sudden point of blinding light. 
It crept up by slight degrees and spread sideways in a thin crescent 
blade, and within seconds two suns were visible, furnaces of light, 
searing the black edge of the horizon with white fire. Fierce shafts of 
colour streaked through the thin atmosphere beneath them. 
"The fires of dawn... " breathed Zaphod. "The twin suns of 
Soulianis and Rahm... " 
"Or whatever," said Ford quietly. 
"Soulianis and Rahm " insisted Zaphod. 
The suns blazed into the pitch of space and a low ghostly music 
floated through the bridge: Marvin was humming ironically because 
he hated humans so much. 
As Ford gazed at the spectacle of light before them excitement 
burnt inside him, but only the excitement of seeing a strange new 
planet, it was enough for him to see it as it was. It faintly irritated him 
that Zaphod had to impose some ludicrous fantasy on to the scene to 
make it work for him. All this Magrathea nonsense seemed juvenile. 
Isn't it enough to see that a garden is beautiful without having to 
believe that there are fairies at the bottom of it too? 
All this Magrathea business seemed totally incomprehensible to 
Arthur. He edged up to Trillian and asked her what was going on. 
"I only know what Zaphod's told me," she whispered. "Apparently 
Magrathea is some kind of legend from way back which no one 
seriously believes in. Bit like Atlantis on Earth, except that the legends 
say the Magratheans used to manufacture planets." 
Arthur blinked at the screens and felt he was missing something 
important. Suddenly he realized what it was. 
"Is there any tea on this spaceship?" he asked. 
More of the planet was unfolding beneath them as the Heart of 
Gold streaked along its orbital path. The suns now stood high in the 
black sky, the pyrotechnics of dawn were over, and the surface of the 
planet appeared bleak and forbidding in the common light of day ʹ
grey, dusty and only dimly contoured. It looked dead and cold as a 
crypt. From time to time promising features would appear on the 
distant horizon ʹ ravines, maybe mountains, maybe even cities ʹ but 
as they approached the lines would soften and blur into anonymity 
and nothing would transpire. The planet's surface was blurred by time, 
by the slow movement of the thin stagnant air that had crept across it 
for century upon century. 
Clearly, it was very very old. 
A moment of doubt came to Ford as he watched the grey 
landscape move beneath them. The immensity of time worried him, 
he could feel it as a presence. He cleared his throat. 
"Well, even supposing it is..." 
"It is," said Zaphod. 
"Which it isn't," continued Ford. "What do you want with it anyway? 
There's nothing there." 
"Not on the surface," said Zaphod. 
"Alright, just supposing there's something. I take it you're not here 
for the sheer industrial archaeology of it all. What are you after?" 
One of Zaphod's heads looked away. The other one looked round 
to see what the first was looking at, but it wasn't looking at anything 
very much. 
"Well," said Zaphod airily, "it's partly the curiosity, partly a sense of 
adventure, but mostly I think it's the fame and the money..." 
Ford glanced at him sharply. He got a very strong impression that 
Zaphod hadn't the faintest idea why he was there at all. 
"You know I don't like the look of that planet at all," said Trillian 
shivering. 
"Ah, take no notice," said Zaphod, "with half the wealth of the 
former Galactic Empire stored on it somewhere it can afford to look 
frumpy." 
Bullshit, thought Ford. Even supposing this was the home of some 
ancient civilization now gone to dust, even supposing a number of 
exceedingly unlikely things, there was no way that vast treasures of 
wealth were going to be stored there in any form that would still have 
meaning now. He shrugged. 
"I think it's just a dead planet," he said. 
"The suspense is killing me," said Arthur testily.
Stress and nervous tension are now serious social problems in all 
parts of the Galaxy, and it is in order that this situation should not in 
any way be exacerbated that the following facts will now be revealed 
in advance. 
The planet in question is in fact the legendary Magrathea. 
The deadly missile attack shortly to be launched by an ancient 
automatic defence system will result merely in the breakage of three 
coffee cups and a micecage, the bruising of somebody's upper arm, 
and the untimely creation and sudden demise of a bowl of petunias 
and an innocent sperm whale. 
In order that some sense of mystery should still be preserved, no 
revelation will yet be made concerning whose upper arm sustained 
the bruise. This fact may safely be made the subject of suspense since 
it is of no significance whatsoever. 
Chapter 17
After a fairly shaky start to the day, Arthur's mind was beginning to 
reassemble itself from the shellshocked fragments the previous day 
had left him with. He had found a Nutri`Matic machine which had 
provided him with a plastic cup filled with a liquid that was almost, 
but not quite, entirely unlike tea. The way it functioned was very 
interesting. When the Drink button was pressed it made an instant 
but highly detailed examination of the subject's taste buds, a 
spectroscopic analysis of the subject's metabolism and then sent tiny 
experimental signals down the neural pathways to the taste centres 
of the subject's brain to see what was likely to go down well. However, 
no one knew quite why it did this because it invariably delivered a 
cupful of liquid that was almost, but not quite, entirely unlike tea. The 
Nutri`Matic was designed and manufactured by the Sirius Cybernetics 
Corporation whose complaints department now covers all the major 
land masses of the first three planets in the Sirius Tau Star system. 
Arthur drank the liquid and found it reviving. He glanced up at the 
screens again and watched a few more hundred miles of barren 
greyness slide past. It suddenly occurred to him to ask a question 
which had been bothering him. 
"Is it safe?" he said. 
"Magrathea's been dead for five million years," said Zaphod, "of 
course it's safe. Even the ghosts will have settled down and raised 
families by now." At which point a strange and inexplicable sound 
thrilled suddenly through the bridge ʹ a noise as of a distant fanfare; 
a hollow, reedy, insubstantial sound. It preceded a voice that was 
equally hollow, reedy and insubstantial. The voice said "Greetings to 
you..." 
Someone from the dead planet was talking to them. 
"Computer " shouted Zaphod. 
"Hi there " 
"What the photon is it?" 
"Oh, just some five`million`year`old tape that's being broadcast at 
us." 
"A what? A recording?" 
"Shush " said Ford. "It's carrying on." 
The voice was old, courteous, almost charming, but was 
underscored with quite unmistakable menace. 
"This is a recorded announcement," it said, "as I'm afraid we're all 
out at the moment. The commercial council of Magrathea thanks you 
for your esteemed visit..." 
("A voice from ancient Magrathea " shouted Zaphod. "OK, OK," 
said Ford.) 
"... but regrets," continued the voice, "that the entire planet is 
temporarily closed for business. Thank you. If you would care to leave 
your name and the address of a planet where you can be contacted, 
kindly speak when you hear the tone." 
A short buzz followed, then silence. 
"They want to get rid of us," said Trillian nervously. "What do we 
do?" 
"It's just a recording," said Zaphod. "We keep going. Got that, 
computer?" 
"I got it," said the computer and gave the ship an extra kick of 
speed. 
They waited. 
After a second or so came the fanfare once again, and then the 
voice. 
"We would like to assure you that as soon as our business is 
resumed announcements will be made in all fashionable magazines 
and colour supplements, when our clients will once again be able to 
select from all that's best in contemporary geography." The menace 
in the voice took on a sharper edge. "Meanwhile we thank our clients 
for their kind interest and would ask them to leave. Now." 
Arthur looked round the nervous faces of his companions. 
"Well, I suppose we'd better be going then, hadn't we?" he 
suggested. 
"Shhh " said Zaphod. "There's absolutely nothing to be worried 
about." 
"Then why's everyone so tense?" 
"They're just interested " shouted Zaphod. "Computer, start a 
descent into the atmosphere and prepare for landing." 
This time the fanfare was quite perfunctory, the voice distinctly 
cold. 
"It is most gratifying," it said, "that your enthusiasm for our planet 
continues unabated, and so we would like to assure you that the 
guided missiles currently converging with your ship are part of a 
special service we extend to all of our most enthusiastic clients, and 
the fully armed nuclear warheads are of course merely a courtesy 
detail. We look forward to your custom in future lives... thank you." 
The voice snapped off. 
"Oh," said Trillian. 
"Er..." said Arthur. 
"Well?" said Ford. 
"Look," said Zaphod, "will you get it into your heads? That's just a 
recorded message. It's millions of years old. It doesn't apply to us, get 
it?" 
"What," said Trillian quietly, "about the missiles?" 
"Missiles? Don't make me laugh." 
Ford tapped Zaphod on the shoulder and pointed at the rear 
screen. Clear in the distance behind them two silver darts were 
climbing through the atmosphere towards the ship. A quick change of 
magnification brought them into close focus ʹ two massively real 
rockets thundering through the sky. The suddenness of it was 
shocking. 
"I think they're going to have a very good try at applying to us," 
said Ford. 
Zaphod stared at them in astonishment. 
"Hey this is terrific " he said. "Someone down there is trying to kill 
us " 
"Terrific," said Arthur. 
"But don't you see what this means?" 
"Yes. We're going to die." 
"Yes, but apart from that." 
"Apart from that?" 
"It means we must be on to something "
"How soon can we get off it?" 
Second by second the image of the missiles on the screen became 
larger. They had swung round now on to a direct homing course so 
that all that could be seen of them now was the warheads, head on. 
"As a matter of interest," said Trillian, "what are we going to do?" 
"Just keep cool," said Zaphod. 
"Is that all?" shouted Arthur. 
"No, we're also going to... er... take evasive action " said Zaphod 
with a sudden access of panic. "Computer, what evasive action can 
we take?" 
"Er, none I'm afraid, guys," said the computer. 
"... or something," said Zaphod, "... er..." he said. 
"There seems to be something jamming my guidance system," 
explained the computer brightly, "impact minus forty`five seconds. 
Please call me Eddie if it will help you to relax." 
Zaphod tried to run in several equally decisive directions 
simultaneously. "Right " he said. "Er... we've got to get manual 
control of this ship." 
"Can you fly her?" asked Ford pleasantly. 
"No, can you?" 
"No." 
"Trillian, can you?" 
"No." 
"Fine," said Zaphod, relaxing. "We'll do it together." 
"I can't either," said Arthur, who felt it was time he began to assert 
himself. 
"I'd guessed that," said Zaphod. "OK computer, I want full manual 
control now." 
"You got it," said the computer. 
Several large desk panels slid open and banks of control consoles 
sprang up out of them, showering the crew with bits of expanded 
polystyrene packaging and balls of rolled`up cellophane: these 
controls had never been used before. 
Zaphod stared at them wildly. 
"OK, Ford," he said, "full retro thrust and ten degrees starboard. Or 
something..." 
"Good luck guys," chirped the computer, "impact minus thirty 
seconds..." 
Ford leapt to the controls ʹ only a few of them made any 
immediate sense to him so he pulled those. The ship shook and 
screamed as its guidance rocked jets tried to push it every which way 
simultaneously. He released half of them and the ship span round in a 
tight arc and headed back the way it had come, straight towards the 
oncoming missiles. 
Air cushions ballooned out of the walls in an instant as everyone 
was thrown against them. For a few seconds the inertial forces held 
them flattened and squirming for breath, unable to move. Zaphod 
struggled and pushed in manic desperation and finally managed a 
savage kick at a small lever that formed part of the guidance system. 
The lever snapped off. The ship twisted sharply and rocketed 
upwards. The crew were hurled violently back across the cabin. Ford's 
copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy smashed into another 
section of the control console with the combined result that the 
Guide started to explain to anyone who cared to listen about the best 
ways of smuggling Antarean parakeet glands out of Antares (an 
Antarean parakeet gland stuck on a small stick is a revolting but much 
sought after cocktail delicacy and very large sums of money are often 
paid for them by very rich idiots who want to impress other very rich 
idiots), and the ship suddenly dropped out of the sky like a stone. 
It was of course more or less at this moment that one of the crew 
sustained a nasty bruise to the upper arm. This should be emphasized 
because, as had already been revealed, they escape otherwise 
completely unharmed and the deadly nuclear missiles do not 
eventually hit the ship. The safety of the crew is absolutely assured. 
"Impact minus twenty seconds, guys..." said the computer. 
"Then turn the bloody engines back on " bawled Zaphod. 
"OK, sure thing, guys," said the computer. With a subtle roar the 
engines cut back in, the ship smoothly flattened out of its dive and 
headed back towards the missiles again. 
The computer started to sing. 
"When you walk through the storm..." it whined nasally, "hold your 
head up high..." 
Zaphod screamed at it to shut up, but his voice was lost in the din 
of what they quite naturally assumed was approaching destruction. 
"And don't... be afraid... of the dark " Eddie wailed. 
The ship, in flattening out had in fact flattened out upside down 
and lying on the ceiling as they were it was now totally impossible for 
any of the crew to reach the guidance systems. 
"At the end of the storm..." crooned Eddie. 
The two missiles loomed massively on the screens as they 
thundered towards the ship. 
"... is a golden sky..." 
But by an extraordinarily lucky chance they had not yet fully 
corrected their flight paths to that of the erratically weaving ship, and 
they passed right under it. 
"And the sweet silver songs of the lark... Revised impact time 
fifteen seconds fellas... Walk on through the wind..." 
The missiles banked round in a screeching arc and plunged back 
into pursuit. 
"This is it," said Arthur watching them. "We are now quite 
definitely going to die aren't we?" 
"I wish you'd stop saying that," shouted Ford. 
"Well we are aren't we?" 
"Yes." 
"Walk on through the rain..." sang Eddie. 
A thought struck Arthur. He struggled to his feet. 
"Why doesn't anyone turn on this Improbability Drive thing?" he 
said. "We could probably reach that." 
"What are you crazy?" said Zaphod. "Without proper programming 
anything could happen." 
"Does that matter at this stage?" shouted Arthur. 
"Though your dreams be tossed and blown..." sand Eddie. 
Arthur scrambled up on to one end of the excitingly chunky pieces 
of moulded contouring where the curve of the wall met the ceiling. 
"Walk on, walk on, with hope in your heart..." 
"Does anyone know why Arthur can't turn on the Improbability 
Drive?" shouted Trillian. 
"And you'll never walk alone... Impact minus five seconds, it's been 
great knowing you guys, God bless... You'll ne... ver... walk... alone " 
"I said," yelled Trillian, "does anyone know..." 
The next thing that happened was a mid`mangling explosion of 
noise and light. 
Chapter 18
And the next thing that happened after that was that the Heart of 
Gold continued on its way perfectly normally with a rather fetchingly 
redesigned interior. It was somewhat larger, and done out in delicate 
pastel shades of green and blue. In the centre a spiral staircase, 
leading nowhere in particular, stood in a spray of ferns and yellow 
flowers and next to it a stone sundial pedestal housed the main 
computer terminal. Cunningly deployed lighting and mirrors created 
the illusion of standing in a conservatory overlooking a wide stretch of 
exquisitely manicured garden. Around the periphery of the 
conservatory area stood marble`topped tables on intricately beautiful 
wrought`iron legs. As you gazed into the polished surface of the 
marble the vague forms of instruments became visible, and as you 
touched them the instruments materialized instantly under your 
hands. Looked at from the correct angles the mirrors appeared to 
reflect all the required data readouts, though it was far from clear 
where they were reflected from. It was in fact sensationally beautiful. 
Relaxing in a wickerwork sun chair, Zaphod Beeblebrox said, "What 
the hell happened?" 
"Well I was just saying," said Arthur lounging by a small fish pool, 
"there's this Improbability Drive switch over here..." he waved at 
where it had been. There was a potted plant there now. 
"But where are we?" said Ford who was sitting on the spiral 
staircase, a nicely chilled Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster in his hand. 
"Exactly where we were, I think..." said Trillian, as all about them 
the mirrors showed them an image of the blighted landscape of 
Magrathea which still scooted along beneath them. 
Zaphod leapt out of his seat. 
"Then what's happened to the missiles?" he said. 
A new and astounding image appeared in the mirrors. 
"They would appear," said Ford doubtfully, "to have turned into a 
bowl of petunias and a very surprised looking whale..." 
"At an Improbability Factor," cut in Eddie, who hadn't changed a bit, 
"of eight million seven hundred and sixty`seven thousand one 
hundred and twenty`eight to one against." 
Zaphod stared at Arthur. 
"Did you think of that, Earthman?" he demanded. 
"Well," said Arthur, "all I did was..." 
"That's very good thinking you know. Turn on the Improbability 
Drive for a second without first activating the proofing screens. Hey 
kid you just saved our lives, you know that?" 
"Oh," said Arthur, "well, it was nothing really..." 
"Was it?" said Zaphod. "Oh well, forget it then. OK, computer, take 
us in to land." 
"But..." 
"I said forget it." 
Another thing that got forgotten was the fact that against all 
probability a sperm whale had suddenly been called into existence 
several miles above the surface of an alien planet. 
And since this is not a naturally tenable position for a whale, this 
poor innocent creature had very little time to come to terms with its 
identity as a whale before it then had to come to terms with not being 
a whale any more. 
This is a complete record of its thoughts from the moment it began 
its life till the moment it ended it. 
Ah...  What's happening? it thought. 
Er, excuse me, who am I? 
Hello? 
Why am I here? What's my purpose in life? 
What do I mean by who am I? 
Calm down, get a grip now... oh  this is an interesting sensation, 
what is it? It's a sort of... yawning, tingling sensation in my... my... well 
I suppose I'd better start finding names for things if I want to make 
any headway in what for the sake of what I shall call an argument I 
shall call the world, so let's call it my stomach. 
Good. Ooooh, it's getting quite strong. And hey, what's about this 
whistling roaring sound going past what I'm suddenly going to call my 
head? Perhaps I can call that... wind  Is that a good name? It'll do... 
perhaps I can find a better name for it later when I've found out what 
it's for. It must be something very important because there certainly 
seems to be a hell of a lot of it. Hey  What's this thing? This... let's call 
it a tail ʹ yeah, tail. Hey  I can really thrash it about pretty good can't I? 
Wow  Wow  That feels great  Doesn't seem to achieve very much but 
I'll probably find out what it's for later on. Now ʹ have I built up any 
coherent picture of things yet? 
No. 
Never mind, hey, this is really exciting, so much to find out about, 
so much to look forward to, I'm quite dizzy with anticipation... 
Or is it the wind? 
There really is a lot of that now isn't it? 
And wow  Hey  What's this thing suddenly coming towards me 
very fast? Very very fast. So big and flat and round, it needs a big wide 
sounding name like... ow... ound... round... ground  That's it  That's a 
good name ʹ ground  
I wonder if it will be friends with me? 
And the rest, after a sudden wet thud, was silence. 
Curiously enough, the only thing that went through the mind of the 
bowl of petunias as it fell was Oh no, not again. Many people have 
speculated that if we knew exactly why the bowl of petunias had 
thought that we would know a lot more about the nature of the 
universe than we do now. 
Chapter 19
"Are we taking this robot with us?" said Ford, looking with distaste 
at Marvin who was standing in an awkward hunched posture in the 
corner under a small palm tree. 
Zaphod glanced away from the mirror screens which presented a 
panoramic view of the blighted landscape on which the Heart of Gold 
had now landed. 
"Oh, the Paranoid Android," he said. "Yeah, we'll take him." 
"But what are supposed to do with a manically depressed robot?" 
"You think you've got problems," said Marvin as if he was 
addressing a newly occupied coffin, "what are you supposed to do if 
you are a manically depressed robot? No, don't bother to answer that, 
I'm fifty thousand times more intelligent than you and even I don't 
know the answer. It gives me a headache just trying to think down to 
your level." 
Trillian burst in through the door from her cabin. 
"My white mice have escaped " she said. 
An expression of deep worry and concern failed to cross either of 
Zaphod's faces. 
"Nuts to your white mice," he said. 
Trillian glared an upset glare at him, and disappeared again. 
It is possible that her remark would have commanded greater 
attention had it been generally realized that human beings were only 
the third most intelligent life form present on the planet Earth, 
instead of (as was generally thought by most independent observers) 
the second. 
"Good afternoon boys." 
The voice was oddly familiar, but oddly different. It had a 
matriarchal twang. It announced itself to the crew as they arrived at 
the airlock hatchway that would let them out on the planet surface. 
They looked at each other in puzzlement. 
"It's the computer," explained Zaphod. "I discovered it had an 
emergency back`up personality that I thought might work out better." 
"Now this is going to be your first day out on a strange new 
planet," continued Eddie's new voice, "so I want you all wrapped up 
snug and warm, and no playing with any naughty bug`eyed 
monsters." 
Zaphod tapped impatiently on the hatch. 
"I'm sorry," he said, "I think we might be better off with a slide 
rule." 
"Right " snapped the computer. "Who said that?" 
"Will you open the exit hatch please, computer?" said Zaphod 
trying not to get angry. 
"Not until whoever said that owns up," urged the computer, 
stamping a few synapses closed. 
"Oh God," muttered Ford, slumped against a bulkhead and started 
to count to ten. He was desperately worried that one day sentinent 
life forms would forget how to do this. Only by counting could 
humans demonstrate their independence of computers. 
"Come on," said Eddie sternly. 
"Computer..." began Zaphod... 
"I'm waiting," interrupted Eddie. "I can wait all day if necessary..." 
"Computer..." said Zaphod again, who had been trying to think of 
some subtle piece of reasoning to put the computer down with, and
had decided not to bother competing with it on its own ground, "if 
you don't open that exit hatch this moment I shall zap straight off to 
your major data banks and reprogram you with a very large axe, got 
that?" 
Eddie, shocked, paused and considered this. 
Ford carried on counting quietly. This is about the most aggressive 
thing you can do to a computer, the equivalent of going up to a 
human being and saying Blood... blood... blood... blood... 
Finally Eddie said quietly, "I can see this relationship is something 
we're all going to have to work at," and the hatchway opened. 
An icy wind ripped into them, they hugged themselves warmly and 
stepped down the ramp on to the barren dust of Magrathea. 
"It'll all end in tears, I know it," shouted Eddie after them and 
closed the hatchway again. 
A few minutes later he opened and closed the hatchway again in 
response to a command that caught him entirely by surprise. 
Chapter 20
Five figures wandered slowly over the blighted land. Bits of it were 
dullish grey, bits of it dullish brown, the rest of it rather less 
interesting to look at. It was like a dried`out marsh, now barren of all 
vegetation and covered with a layer of dust about an inch thick. It was 
very cold. 
Zaphod was clearly rather depressed about it. He stalked off by 
himself and was soon lost to sight behind a slight rise in the ground. 
The wind stung Arthur's eyes and ears, and the stale thin air 
clasped his throat. However, the thing stung most was his mind. 
"It's fantastic..." he said, and his own voice rattled his ears. Sound 
carried badly in this thin atmosphere. 
"Desolate hole if you ask me," said Ford. "I could have more fun in 
a cat litter." He felt a mounting irritation. Of all the planets in all the 
star systems of all the Galaxy ʹ didn't he just have to turn up at a 
dump like this after fifteen years of being a castaway? Not even a hot 
dog stand in evidence. He stooped down and picked up a cold clot of 
earth, but there was nothing underneath it worth crossing thousands 
of light years to look at. 
"No," insisted Arthur, "don't you understand, this is the first time 
I've actually stood on the surface of another planet... a whole alien 
world...  Pity it's such a dump though." 
Trillian hugged herself, shivered and frowned. She could have 
sworn she saw a slight and unexpected movement out of the corner 
of her eye, but when she glanced in that direction all she could see 
was the ship, still and silent, a hundred yards or so behind them. 
She was relieved when a second or so later they caught sight of 
Zaphod standing on top of the ridge of ground and waving to them to 
come and join him. 
He seemed to be excited, but they couldn't clearly hear what he 
was saying because of the thinnish atmosphere and the wind. 
As they approached the ridge of higher ground they became aware 
that it seemed to be circular ʹ a crater about a hundred and fifty 
yards wide. Round the outside of the crater the sloping ground was 
spattered with black and red lumps. They stopped and looked at a 
piece. It was wet. It was rubbery. 
With horror they suddenly realized that it was fresh whalemeat. 
At the top of the crater's lip they met Zaphod. 
"Look," he said, pointing into the crater. 
In the centre lay the exploded carcass of a lonely sperm whale that 
hadn't lived long enough to be disappointed with its lot. The silence 
was only disturbed by the slight involuntary spasms of Trillian's throat. 
"I suppose there's no point in trying to bury it?" murmured Arthur, 
and then wished he hadn't. 
"Come," said Zaphod and started back down into the crater. 
"What, down there?" said Trillian with severe distaste. 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "come on, I've got something to show you." 
"We can see it," said Trillian. 
"Not that," said Zaphod, "something else. Come on." 
They all hesitated. 
"Come on," insisted Zaphod, "I've found a way in." 
"In?" said Arthur in horror. 
"Into the interior of the planet  An underground passage. The force 
of the whale's impact cracked it open, and that's where we have to go. 
Where no man has trod these five million years, into the very depths 
of time itself..." 
Marvin started his ironical humming again. 
Zaphod hit him and he shut up. 
With little shudders of disgust they all followed Zaphod down the 
incline into the crater, trying very hard not to look at its unfortunate 
creator. 
"Life," said Marvin dolefully, "loathe it or ignore it, you can't like it." 
The ground had caved in where the whale had hit it revealing a 
network of galleries and passages, now largely obstructed by 
collapsed rubble and entrails. Zaphod had made a start clearing a way 
into one of them, but Marvin was able to do it rather faster. Dank air 
wafted out of its dark recesses, and as Zaphod shone a torch into it, 
little was visible in the dusty gloom. 
"According to the legends," he said, "the Magratheans lived most 
of their lives underground." 
"Why's that?" said Arthur. "Did the surface become too polluted or 
overpopulated?" 
"No, I don't think so," said Zaphod. "I think they just didn't like it 
very much." 
"Are you sure you know what you're doing?" said Trillian peering 
nervously into the darkness. "We've been attacked once already you 
know." 
"Look kid, I promise you the live population of this planet is nil plus 
the four of us, so come on, let's get on in there. Er, hey Earthman..." 
"Arthur," said Arthur. 
"Yeah could you just sort of keep this robot with you and guard this 
end of the passageway. OK?" 
"Guard?" said Arthur. "What from? You just said there's no one 
here." 
"Yeah, well, just for safety, OK?" said Zaphod. 
"Whose? Yours or mine?" 
"Good lad. OK, here we go." 
Zaphod scrambled down into the passage, followed by Trillian and 
Ford. 
"Well I hope you all have a really miserable time," complained 
Arthur. 
"Don't worry," Marvin assured him, "they will." 
In a few seconds they had disappeared from view. 
Arthur stamped around in a huff, and then decided that a whale's 
graveyard is not on the whole a good place to stamp around in. 
Marvin eyed him balefully for a moment, and then turned himself 
off. 
Zaphod marched quickly down the passageway, nervous as hell, 
but trying to hide it by striding purposefully. He flung the torch beam 
around. The walls were covered in dark tiles and were cold to the 
touch, the air thick with decay. 
"There, what did I tell you?" he said. "An inhabited planet. 
Magrathea," and he strode on through the dirt and debris that 
littered the tile floor. 
Trillian was reminded unavoidably of the London Underground, 
though it was less thoroughly squalid. 
At intervals along the walls the tiles gave way to large mosaics ʹ
simple angular patterns in bright colours. Trillian stopped and studied 
one of them but could not interpret any sense in them. She called to 
Zaphod. 
"Hey, have you any idea what these strange symbols are?" 
"I think they're just strange symbols of some kind," said Zaphod, 
hardly glancing back. 
Trillian shrugged and hurried after him. 
From time to time a doorway led either to the left or right into 
smallish chambers which Ford discovered to be full of derelict 
computer equipment. He dragged Zaphod into one to have a look. 
Trillian followed. 
"Look," said Ford, "you reckon this is Magrathea..." 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "and we heard the voice, right?" 
"OK, so I've bought the fact that it's Magrathea ʹ for the moment. 
What you have so far said nothing about is how in the Galaxy you 
found it. You didn't just look it up in a star atlas, that's for sure." 
"Research. Government archives. Detective work. Few lucky 
guesses. Easy." 
"And then you stole the Heart of Gold to come and look for it 
with?" 
"I stole it to look for a lot of things." 
"A lot of things?" said Ford in surprise. "Like what?" 
"I don't know." 
"What?" 
"I don't know what I'm looking for." 
"Why not?" 
"Because... because... I think it might be because if I knew I 
wouldn't be able to look for them." 
"What, are you crazy?" 
"It's a possibility I haven't ruled out yet," said Zaphod quietly. "I 
only know as much about myself as my mind can work out under its 
current conditions. And its current conditions are not good." 
For a long time nobody said anything as Ford gazed at Zaphod with 
a mind suddenly full of worry. 
"Listen old friend, if you want to..." started Ford eventually. 
"No, wait... I'll tell you something," said Zaphod. "I freewheel a lot. 
I get an idea to do something, and, hey, why not, I do it. I reckon I'll 
become President of the Galaxy, and it just happens, it's easy. I decide 
to steal this ship. I decide to look for Magrathea, and it all just 
happens. Yeah, I work out how it can best be done, right, but it always 
works out. It's like having a Galacticredit card which keeps on working 
though you never send off the cheques. And then whenever I stop 
and think ʹ why did I want to do something? ʹ how did I work out 
how to do it? ʹ I get a very strong desire just to stop thinking about it. 
Like I have now. It's a big effort to talk about it." 
Zaphod paused for a while. For a while there was silence. Then he 
frowned and said, "Last night I was worrying about this again. About 
the fact that part of my mind just didn't seem to work properly. Then 
it occurred to me that the way it seemed was that someone else was 
using my mind to have good ideas with, without telling me about it. I 
put the two ideas together and decided that maybe that somebody 
had locked off part of my mind for that purpose, which was why I 
couldn't use it. I wondered if there was a way I could check. 
"I went to the ship's medical bay and plugged myself into the 
encephelographic screen. I went through every major screening test 
on both my heads ʹ all the tests I had to go through under 
government medical officers before my nomination for Presidency 
could be properly ratified. They showed up nothing. Nothing 
unexpected at least. They showed that I was clever, imaginative,
irresponsible, untrustworthy, extrovert, nothing you couldn't have 
guessed. And no other anomalies. So I started inventing further tests, 
completely at random. Nothing. Then I tried superimposing the 
results from one head on top of the results from the other head. Still 
nothing. Finally I got silly, because I'd given it all up as nothing more 
than an attack of paranoia. Last thing I did before I packed it in was 
take the superimposed picture and look at it through a green filter. 
You remember I was always superstitious about the color green when 
I was a kid? I always wanted to be a pilot on one of the trading 
scouts?" 
Ford nodded. 
"And there it was," said Zaphod, "clear as day. A whole section in 
the middle of both brains that related only to each other and not to 
anything else around them. Some bastard had cauterized all the 
synapses and electronically traumatised those two lumps of 
cerebellum." 
Ford stared at him, aghast. Trillian had turned white. 
"Somebody did that to you?" whispered Ford. 
"Yeah." 
"But have you any idea who? Or why?" 
"Why? I can only guess. But I do know who the bastard was." 
"You know? How do you know?" 
"Because they left their initials burnt into the cauterized synapses. 
They left them there for me to see." 
Ford stared at him in horror and felt his skin begin to crawl. 
"Initials? Burnt into your brain?" 
"Yeah." 
"Well, what were they, for God's sake?" 
Zaphod looked at him in silence again for a moment. Then he 
looked away. 
"Z.B.," he said. 
At that moment a steel shutter slammed down behind them and 
gas started to pour into the chamber. 
"I'll tell you about it later," choked Zaphod as all three passed out. 
Chapter 21
On the surface of Magrathea Arthur wandered about moodily. 
Ford had thoughtfully left him his copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to 
the Galaxy to while away the time with. He pushed a few buttons at 
random. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a very unevenly edited book 
and contains many passages that simply seemed to its editors like a 
good idea at the time. 
One of these (the one Arthur now came across) supposedly relates 
the experiences of one Veet Voojagig, a quiet young student at the 
University of Maximegalon, who pursued a brilliant academic career 
studying ancient philology, transformational ethics and the wave 
harmonic theory of historical perception, and then, after a night of 
drinking Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters with Zaphod Beeblebrox, 
became increasingly obsessed with the problem of what had 
happened to all the biros he'd bought over the past few years. 
There followed a long period of painstaking research during which 
he visited all the major centres of biro loss throughout the galaxy and 
eventually came up with a quaint little theory which quite caught the 
public imagination at the time. Somewhere in the cosmos, he said, 
along with all the planets inhabited by humanoids, reptiloids, fishoids, 
walking treeoids and superintelligent shades of the colour blue, there 
was also a planet entirely given over to biro life forms. And it was to 
this planet that unattended biros would make their way, slipping 
away quietly through wormholes in space to a world where they 
knew they could enjoy a uniquely biroid lifestyle, responding to highly 
biro`oriented stimuli, and generally leading the biro equivalent of the 
good life. 
And as theories go this was all very fine and pleasant until Veet 
Voojagig suddenly claimed to have found this planet, and to have 
worked there for a while driving a limousine for a family of cheap
green retractables, whereupon he was taken away, locked up, wrote 
a book, and was finally sent into tax exile, which is the usual fate 
reserved for those who are determined to make a fool of themselves 
in public. 
When one day an expedition was sent to the spatial coordinates 
that Voojagig had claimed for this planet they discovered only a small 
asteroid inhabited by a solitary old man who claimed repeatedly that 
nothing was true, though he was later discovered to be lying. 
There did, however, remain the question of both the mysterious 
60,000 Altairan dollars paid yearly into his Brantisvogan bank account, 
and of course Zaphod Beeblebrox's highly profitable second`hand biro 
business. 
Arthur read this, and put the book down. 
The robot still sat there, completely inert. 
Arthur got up and walked to the top of the crater. He walked 
around the crater. He watched two suns set magnificently over 
Magrathea. 
He went back down into the crater. He woke the robot up because 
even a manically depressed robot is better to talk to than nobody. 
"Night's falling," he said. "Look robot, the stars are coming out." 
From the heart of a dark nebula it is possible to see very few stars, 
and only very faintly, but they were there to be seen. 
The robot obediently looked at them, then looked back. 
"I know," he said. "Wretched isn't it?" 
"But that sunset  I've never seen anything like it in my wildest 
dreams... the two suns  It was like mountains of fire boiling into 
space." 
"I've seen it," said Marvin. "It's rubbish." 
"We only ever had the one sun at home," persevered Arthur, "I 
came from a planet called Earth you know." 
"I know," said Marvin, "you keep going on about it. It sounds 
awful." 
"Ah no, it was a beautiful place." 
"Did it have oceans?" 
"Oh yes," said Arthur with a sigh, "great wide rolling blue oceans..." 
"Can't bear oceans," said Marvin. 
"Tell me," inquired Arthur, "do you get on well with other robots?" 
"Hate them," said Marvin. "Where are you going?" 
Arthur couldn't bear any more. He had got up again. 
"I think I'll just take another walk," he said. 
"Don't blame you," said Marvin and counted five hundred and 
ninety`seven thousand million sheep before falling asleep again a 
second later. 
Arthur slapped his arms about himself to try and get his circulation 
a little more enthusiastic about its job. He trudged back up the wall of 
the crater. 
Because the atmosphere was so thin and because there was no 
moon, nightfall was very rapid and it was by now very dark. Because 
of this, Arthur practically walked into the old man before he noticed 
him. 
Chapter 22
He was standing with his back to Arthur watching the very last 
glimmers of light sink into blackness behind the horizon. He was 
tallish, elderly and dressed in a single long grey robe. When he turned 
his face was thin and distinguished, careworn but not unkind, the sort 
of face you would happily bank with. But he didn't turn yet, not even 
to react to Arthur's yelp of surprise. 
Eventually the last rays of the sun had vanished completely, and he 
turned. His face was still illuminated from somewhere, and when 
Arthur looked for the source of the light he saw that a few yards away 
stood a small craft of some kind ʹ a small hovercraft, Arthur guessed. 
It shed a dim pool of light around it. 
The man looked at Arthur, sadly it seemed. 
"You choose a cold night to visit our dead planet," he said. 
"Who... who are you?" stammered Arthur. 
The man looked away. Again a kind of sadness seemed to cross his 
face. 
"My name is not important," he said. 
He seemed to have something on his mind. Conversation was 
clearly something he felt he didn't have to rush at. Arthur felt 
awkward. 
"I... er... you startled me..." he said, lamely. 
The man looked round to him again and slightly raised his 
eyebrows. 
"Hmmmm?" he said. 
"I said you startled me." 
"Do not be alarmed, I will not harm you." 
Arthur frowned at him. "But you shot at us  There were missiles..." 
he said. 
The man chuckled slightly. 
"An automatic system," he said and gave a small sigh. "Ancient 
computers ranged in the bowels of the planet tick away the dark 
millennia, and the ages hang heavy on their dusty data banks. I think 
they take the occasional pot shot to relieve the monotony."
He looked gravely at Arthur and said, "I'm a great fan of science 
you know." 
"Oh... er, really?" said Arthur, who was beginning to find the man's 
curious, kindly manner disconcerting. 
"Oh, yes," said the old man, and simply stopped talking again. 
"Ah," said Arthur, "er..." He had an odd felling of being like a man 
in the act of adultery who is surprised when the woman's husband 
wanders into the room, changes his trousers, passes a few idle 
remarks about the weather and leaves again. 
"You seem ill at ease," said the old man with polite concern. 
"Er, no... well, yes. Actually you see, we weren't really expecting to 
find anybody about in fact. I sort of gathered that you were all dead 
or something..." 
"Dead?" said the old man. "Good gracious no, we have but slept." 
"Slept?" said Arthur incredulously. 
"Yes, through the economic recession you see," said the old man, 
apparently unconcerned about whether Arthur understood a word he 
was talking about or not. 
"Er, economic recession?" 
"Well you see, five million years ago the Galactic economy 
collapsed, and seeing that custom`made planets are something of a 
luxury commodity you see..." 
He paused and looked at Arthur. 
"You know we built planets do you?" he asked solemnly. 
"Well yes," said Arthur, "I'd sort of gathered..." 
"Fascinating trade," said the old man, and a wistful look came into 
his eyes, "doing the coastlines was always my favourite. Used to have 
endless fun doing the little bits in fjords... so anyway," he said trying 
to find his thread again, "the recession came and we decided it would 
save us a lot of bother if we just slept through it. So we programmed 
the computers to revive us when it was all over." 
The man stifled a very slight yawn and continued. 
"The computers were index linked to the Galactic stock market 
prices you see, so that we'd all be revived when everybody else had 
rebuilt the economy enough to afford our rather expensive services." 
Arthur, a regular Guardian reader, was deeply shocked at this. 
"That's a pretty unpleasant way to behave isn't it?" 
"Is it?" asked the old man mildly. "I'm sorry, I'm a bit out of touch." 
He pointed down into the crater. 
"Is that robot yours?" he said. 
"No," came a thin metallic voice from the crater, "I'm mine." 
"If you'd call it a robot," muttered Arthur. "It's more a sort of 
electronic sulking machine." 
"Bring it," said the old man. Arthur was quite surprised to hear a 
note of decision suddenly present in the old man's voice. He called to 
Marvin who crawled up the slope making a big show of being lame, 
which he wasn't. 
"On second thoughts," said the old man, "leave it here. You must 
come with me. Great things are afoot." He turned towards his craft 
which, though no apparent signal had been given, now drifted quietly 
towards them through the dark. 
Arthur looked down at Marvin, who now made an equally big show 
of turning round laboriously and trudging off down into the crater 
again muttering sour nothings to himself. 
"Come," called the old man, "come now or you will be late." 
"Late?" said Arthur. "What for?" 
"What is your name, human?" 
"Dent. Arthur Dent," said Arthur. 
"Late, as in the late Dentarthurdent," said the old man, sternly. "It's 
a sort of threat you see." Another wistful look came into his tired old 
eyes. "I've never been very good at them myself, but I'm told they can 
be very effective." 
Arthur blinked at him. 
"What an extraordinary person," he muttered to himself. 
"I beg your pardon?" said the old man. 
"Oh nothing, I'm sorry," said Arthur in embarrassment. "Alright, 
where do we go?" 
"In my aircar," said the old man motioning Arthur to get into the 
craft which had settled silently next to them. "We are going deep into 
the bowels of the planet where even now our race is being revived 
from its five`million`year slumber. Magrathea awakes." 
Arthur shivered involuntarily as he seated himself next to the old 
man. The strangeness of it, the silent bobbing movement of the craft 
as it soared into the night sky quite unsettled him. 
He looked at the old man, his face illuminated by the dull glow of 
tiny lights on the instrument panel. 
"Excuse me," he said to him, "what is your name by the way?" 
"My name?" said the old man, and the same distant sadness came 
into his face again. He paused. "My name," he said, "... is 
Slartibartfast." 
Arthur practically choked. 
"I beg your pardon?" he spluttered. 
"Slartibartfast," repeated the old man quietly. 
"Slartibartfast?" 
The old man looked at him gravely. 
"I said it wasn't important," he said. 
The aircar sailed through the night. 
Chapter 23
It is an important and popular fact that things are not always what 
they seem. For instance, on the planet Earth, man had always 
assumed that he was more intelligent than dolphins because he had 
achieved so much ʹ the wheel, New York, wars and so on ʹ whilst all 
the dolphins had ever done was muck about in the water having a 
good time. But conversely, the dolphins had always believed that they 
were far more intelligent than man ʹ for precisely the same reasons. 
Curiously enough, the dolphins had long known of the impending 
destruction of the planet Earth and had made many attempts to alert 
mankind of the danger; but most of their communications were 
misinterpreted as amusing attempts to punch footballs or whistle for 
tidbits, so they eventually gave up and left the Earth by their own 
means shortly before the Vogons arrived. 
The last ever dolphin message was misinterpreted as a surprisingly 
sophisticated attempt to do a double`backwards`somersault through 
a hoop whilst whistling the "Star Sprangled Banner", but in fact the 
message was this: So long and thanks for all the fish. 
In fact there was only one species on the planet more intelligent 
than dolphins, and they spent a lot of their time in behavioural 
research laboratories running round inside wheels and conducting 
frighteningly elegant and subtle experiments on man. The fact that 
once again man completely misinterpreted this relationship was 
entirely according to these creatures' plans. 
Chapter 24
Silently the aircar coasted through the cold darkness, a single soft 
glow of light that was utterly alone in the deep Magrathean night. It 
sped swiftly. Arthur's companion seemed sunk in his own thoughts, 
and when Arthur tried on a couple of occasions to engage him in 
conversation again he would simply reply by asking if he was 
comfortable enough, and then left it at that. 
Arthur tried to gauge the speed at which they were travelling, but 
the blackness outside was absolute and he was denied any reference 
points. The sense of motion was so soft and slight he could almost 
believe they were hardly moving at all. 
Then a tiny glow of light appeared in the far distance and within 
seconds had grown so much in size that Arthur realized it was 
travelling towards them at a colossal speed, and he tried to make out 
what sort of craft it might be. He peered at it, but was unable to 
discern any clear shape, and suddenly gasped in alarm as the aircraft 
dipped sharply and headed downwards in what seemed certain to be 
a collision course. Their relative velocity seemed unbelievable, and 
Arthur had hardly time to draw breath before it was all over. The next 
thing he was aware of was an insane silver blur that seemed to 
surround him. He twisted his head sharply round and saw a small 
black point dwindling rapidly in the distance behind them, and it took 
him several seconds to realize what had happened. 
They had plunged into a tunnel in the ground. The colossal speed 
had been their own relative to the glow of light which was a 
stationary hole in the ground, the mouth of the tunnel. The insane 
blur of silver was the circular wall of the tunnel down which they 
were shooting, apparently at several hundred miles an hour. 
He closed his eyes in terror. 
After a length of time which he made no attempt to judge, he 
sensed a slight subsidence in their speed and some while later 
became aware that they were gradually gliding to a gentle halt. 
He opened his eyes again. They were still in the silver tunnel, 
threading and weaving their way through what appeared to be a 
crisscross warren of converging tunnels. When they finally stopped it 
was in a small chamber of curved steel. Several tunnels also had their 
terminus here, and at the farther end of the chamber Arthur could 
see a large circle of dim irritating light. It was irritating because it 
played tricks with the eyes, it was impossible to focus on it properly or 
tell how near or far it was. Arthur guessed (quite wrongly) that it 
might be ultra violet. 
Slartibartfast turned and regarded Arthur with his solemn old eyes. 
"Earthman," he said, "we are now deep in the heart of Magrathea." 
"How did you know I was an Earthman?" demanded Arthur. 
"These things will become clear to you," said the old man gently, 
"at least," he added with slight doubt in his voice, "clearer than they 
are at the moment." 
He continued: "I should warn you that the chamber we are about 
to pass into does not literally exist within our planet. It is a little too... 
large. We are about to pass through a gateway into a vast tract of 
hyperspace. It may disturb you." 
Arthur made nervous noises. 
Slartibartfast touched a button and added, not entirely reassuringly. 
"It scares the willies out of me. Hold tight." 
The car shot forward straight into the circle of light, and suddenly 
Arthur had a fairly clear idea of what infinity looked like. 
It wasn't infinity in fact. Infinity itself looks flat and uninteresting. 
Looking up into the night sky is looking into infinity ʹ distance is 
incomprehensible and therefore meaningless. The chamber into 
which the aircar emerged was anything but infinite, it was just very 
very big, so that it gave the impression of infinity far better than 
infinity itself. 
Arthur's senses bobbed and span, as, travelling at the immense 
speed he knew the aircar attained, they climbed slowly through the 
open air leaving the gateway through which they had passed an 
invisible pinprick in the shimmering wall behind them. 
The wall. 
The wall defied the imagination ʹ seduced it and defeated it. The 
wall was so paralysingly vast and sheer that its top, bottom and sides 
passed away beyond the reach of sight. The mere shock of vertigo 
could kill a man. 
The wall appeared perfectly flat. It would take the finest laser 
measuring equipment to detect that as it climbed, apparently to 
infinity, as it dropped dizzily away, as it planed out to either side, it 
also curved. It met itself again thirteen light seconds away. In other 
words the wall formed the inside of a hollow sphere, a sphere over 
three million miles across and flooded with unimaginable light. 
"Welcome," said Slartibartfast as the tiny speck that was the aircar, 
travelling now at three times the speed of sound, crept imperceptibly 
forward into the mindboggling space, "welcome," he said, "to our 
factory floor." 
Arthur stared about him in a kind of wonderful horror. Ranged 
away before them, at distances he could neither judge nor even guess 
at, were a series of curious suspensions, delicate traceries of metal 
and light hung about shadowy spherical shapes that hung in the space. 
"This," said Slartibartfast, "is where we make most of our planets 
you see." 
"You mean," said Arthur, trying to form the words, "you mean 
you're starting it all up again now?" 
"No no, good heavens no," exclaimed the old man, "no, the Galaxy 
isn't nearly rich enough to support us yet. No, we've been awakened 
to perform just one extraordinary commission for very... special 
clients from another dimension. It may interest you... there in the 
distance in front of us." 
Arthur followed the old man's finger, till he was able to pick out the 
floating structure he was pointing out. It was indeed the only one of 
the many structures that betrayed any sign of activity about it, though 
this was more a sublimal impression than anything one could put 
one's finger on. 
At the moment however a flash of light arced through the structure 
and revealed in stark relief the patterns that were formed on the dark 
sphere within. Patterns that Arthur knew, rough blobby shapes that 
were as familiar to him as the shapes of words, part of the furniture 
of his mind. For a few seconds he sat in stunned silence as the images 
rushed around his mind and tried to find somewhere to settle down 
and make sense. 
Part of his brain told him that he knew perfectly well what he was 
looking at and what the shapes represented whilst another quite 
sensibly refused to countenance the idea and abdicated responsibility 
for any further thinking in that direction. 
The flash came again, and this time there could be no doubt. 
"The Earth..." whispered Arthur. 
"Well, the Earth Mark Two in fact," said Slartibartfast cheerfully. 
"We're making a copy from our original blueprints." 
There was a pause. 
"Are you trying to tell me," said Arthur, slowly and with control, 
"that you originally... made the Earth?" 
"Oh yes," said Slartibartfast. "Did you ever go to a place... I think it 
was called Norway?" 
"No," said Arthur, "no, I didn't." 
"Pity," said Slartibartfast, "that was one of mine. Won an award 
you know. Lovely crinkly edges. I was most upset to hear about its 
destruction." 
"You were upset " 
"Yes. Five minutes later and it wouldn't have mattered so much. It 
was a quite shocking cock`up." 
"Huh?" said Arthur. 
"The mice were furious." 
"The mice were furious?" 
"Oh yes," said the old man mildly. 
"Yes well so I expect were the dogs and cats and duckbilled 
platypuses, but..." 
"Ah, but they hadn't paid for it you see, had they?" 
"Look," said Arthur, "would it save you a lot of time if I just gave up 
and went mad now?" 
For a while the aircar flew on in awkward silence. Then the old man 
tried patiently to explain. 
"Earthman, the planet you lived on was commissioned, paid for, 
and run by mice. It was destroyed five minutes before the completion 
of the purpose for which it was built, and we've got to build another 
one." 
Only one word registered with Arthur. 
"Mice?" he said. 
"Indeed Earthman." 
"Look, sorry ʹ are we talking about the little white furry things with 
the cheese fixation and women standing on tables screaming in early 
sixties sit coms?" 
Slartibartfast coughed politely. 
"Earthman," he said, "it is sometimes hard to follow your mode of 
speech. Remember I have been asleep inside this planet of Magrathea 
for five million years and know little of these early sixties sit coms of 
which you speak. These creatures you call mice, you see, they are not 
quite as they appear. They are merely the protrusion into our 
dimension of vast hyperintelligent pan`dimensional beings. The whole 
business with the cheese and the squeaking is just a front." 
The old man paused, and with a sympathetic frown continued. 
"They've been experimenting on you I'm afraid." 
Arthur thought about this for a second, and then his face cleared. 
"Ah no," he said, "I see the source of the misunderstanding now. 
No, look you see, what happened was that we used to do 
experiments on them. They were often used in behavioural research, 
Pavlov and all that sort of stuff. So what happened was hat the mice 
would be set all sorts of tests, learning to ring bells, run around mazes 
and things so that the whole nature of the learning process could be 
examined. From our observations of their behaviour we were able to 
learn all sorts of things about our own..." 
Arthur's voice tailed off. 
"Such subtlety..." said Slartibartfast, "one has to admire it." 
"What?" said Arthur. 
"How better to disguise their real natures, and how better to guide 
your thinking. Suddenly running down a maze the wrong way, eating 
the wrong bit of cheese, unexpectedly dropping dead of myxomatosis,
ʹ if it's finely calculated the cumulative effect is enormous." 
He paused for effect. 
"You see, Earthman, they really are particularly clever 
hyperintelligent pan`dimensional beings. Your planet and people have 
formed the matrix of an organic computer running a ten`million`year 
research programme... 
"Let me tell you the whole story. It'll take a little time." 
"Time," said Arthur weakly, "is not currently one of my problems." 
Chapter 25
There are of course many problems connected with life, of which 
some of the most popular are Why are people born? Why do they die? 
Why do they want to spend so much of the intervening time wearing 
digital watches? 
Many many millions of years ago a race of hyperintelligent pan`
dimensional beings (whose physical manifestation in their own pan`
dimensional universe is not dissimilar to our own) got so fed up with 
the constant bickering about the meaning of life which used to 
interrupt their favourite pastime of Brockian Ultra Cricket (a curious 
game which involved suddenly hitting people for no readily apparent 
reason and then running away) that they decided to sit down and 
solve their problems once and for all. 
And to this end they built themselves a stupendous super 
computer which was so amazingly intelligent that even before the 
data banks had been connected up it had started from I think 
therefore I am and got as far as the existence of rice pudding and 
income tax before anyone managed to turn it off. 
It was the size of a small city. 
Its main console was installed in a specially designed executive 
office, mounted on an enormous executive desk of finest 
ultramahagony topped with rich ultrared leather. The dark carpeting 
was discreetly sumptuous, exotic pot plants and tastefully engraved
prints of the principal computer programmers and their families were 
deployed liberally about the room, and stately windows looked out 
upon a tree`lined public square. 
On the day of the Great On`Turning two soberly dressed 
programmers with brief cases arrived and were shown discreetly into 
the office. They were aware that this day they would represent their 
entire race in its greatest moment, but they conducted themselves 
calmly and quietly as they seated themselves deferentially before the 
desk, opened their brief cases and took out their leather`bound 
notebooks. 
Their names were Lunkwill and Fook. 
For a few moments they sat in respectful silence, then, after 
exchanging a quiet glance with Fook, Lunkwill leaned forward and 
touched a small black panel. 
The subtlest of hums indicated that the massive computer was now 
in total active mode. After a pause it spoke to them in a voice rich 
resonant and deep. 
It said: "What is this great task for which I, Deep Thought, the 
second greatest computer in the Universe of Time and Space have 
been called into existence?" 
Lunkwill and Fook glanced at each other in surprise. 
"Your task, O Computer..." began Fook. 
"No, wait a minute, this isn't right," said Lunkwill, worried. "We 
distinctly designed this computer to be the greatest one ever and 
we're not making do with second best. Deep Thought," he addressed 
the computer, "are you not as we designed you to be, the greatest 
most powerful computer in all time?" 
"I described myself as the second greatest," intoned Deep Thought, 
"and such I am." 
Another worried look passed between the two programmers. 
Lunkwill cleared his throat. 
"There must be some mistake," he said, "are you not a greatest 
computer than the Milliard Gargantubrain which can count all the 
atoms in a star in a millisecond?" 
"The Milliard Gargantubrain?" said Deep Thought with 
unconcealed contempt. "A mere abacus ʹ mention it not." 
"And are you not," said Fook leaning anxiously forward, "a greater 
analyst than the Googleplex Star Thinker in the Seventh Galaxy of 
Light and Ingenuity which can calculate the trajectory of every single 
dust particle throughout a five`week Dangrabad Beta sand blizzard?" 
"A five`week sand blizzard?" said Deep Thought haughtily. "You ask 
this of me who have contemplated the very vectors of the atoms in 
the Big Bang itself? Molest me not with this pocket calculator stuff." 
The two programmers sat in uncomfortable silence for a moment. 
Then Lunkwill leaned forward again. 
"But are you not," he said, "a more fiendish disputant than the 
Great Hyperlobic Omni`Cognate Neutron Wrangler of Ciceronicus 12, 
the Magic and Indefatigable?" 
"The Great Hyperlobic Omni`Cognate Neutron Wrangler," said 
Deep Thought thoroughly rolling the r's, "could talk all four legs off an 
Arcturan MegaDonkey ʹ but only I could persuade it to go for a walk 
afterwards." 
"Then what," asked Fook, "is the problem?" 
"There is no problem," said Deep Thought with magnificent ringing 
tones. "I am simply the second greatest computer in the Universe of 
Space and Time."
"But the second?" insisted Lunkwill. "Why do you keep saying the 
second? You're surely not thinking of the Multicorticoid Perspicutron 
Titan Muller are you? Or the Pondermatic? Or the..." 
Contemptuous lights flashed across the computer's console. 
"I spare not a single unit of thought on these cybernetic 
simpletons " he boomed. "I speak of none but the computer that is to 
come after me " 
Fook was losing patience. He pushed his notebook aside and 
muttered, "I think this is getting needlessly messianic." 
"You know nothing of future time," pronounced Deep Thought, 
"and yet in my teeming circuitry I can navigate the infinite delta 
streams of future probability and see that there must one day come a 
computer whose merest operational parameters I am not worthy to 
calculate, but which it will be my fate eventually to design." 
Fook sighed heavily and glanced across to Lunkwill. 
"Can we get on and ask the question?" he said. 
Lunkwill motioned him to wait. 
"What computer is this of which you speak?" he asked. 
"I will speak of it no further in this present time," said Deep 
Thought. "Now. Ask what else of me you will that I may function. 
Speak." 
They shrugged at each other. Fook composed himself. 
"O Deep Thought Computer," he said, "the task we have designed 
you to perform is this. We want you to tell us..." he paused, "... the 
Answer " 
"The answer?" said Deep Thought. "The answer to what?" 
"Life " urged Fook. 
"The Universe " said Lunkwill. 
"Everything " they said in chorus. 
Deep Thought paused for a moment's reflection. 
"Tricky," he said finally. 
"But can you do it?" 
Again, a significant pause. 
"Yes," said Deep Thought, "I can do it." 
"There is an answer?" said Fook with breathless excitement." 
"A simple answer?" added Lunkwill. 
"Yes," said Deep Thought. "Life, the Universe, and Everything. 
There is an answer. But," he added, "I'll have to think about it." 
A sudden commotion destroyed the moment: the door flew open 
and two angry men wearing the coarse faded ʹ blue robes and belts 
of the Cruxwan University burst into the room, thrusting aside the 
ineffectual flunkies who tried to bar their way. 
"We demand admission " shouted the younger of the two men 
elbowing a pretty young secretary in the throat. 
"Come on," shouted the older one, "you can't keep us out " He 
pushed a junior programmer back through the door. 
"We demand that you can't keep us out " bawled the younger one, 
though he was now firmly inside the room and no further attempts 
were being made to stop him. 
"Who are you?" said Lunkwill, rising angrily from his seat. "What do 
you want?" 
"I am Majikthise " announced the older one. 
"And I demand that I am Vroomfondel " shouted the younger one. 
Majikthise turned on Vroomfondel. "It's alright," he explained 
angrily, "you don't need to demand that." 
"Alright " bawled Vroomfondel banging on an nearby desk. "I am 
Vroomfondel, and that is not a demand, that is a solid fact  What we 
demand is solid facts " 
"No we don't " exclaimed Majikthise in irritation. "That is precisely 
what we don't demand " 
Scarcely pausing for breath, Vroomfondel shouted, "We don't 
demand solid facts  What we demand is a total absence of solid facts. 
I demand that I may or may not be Vroomfondel " 
"But who the devil are you?" exclaimed an outraged Fook. 
"We," said Majikthise, "are Philosophers." 
"Though we may not be," said Vroomfondel waving a warning 
finger at the programmers. 
"Yes we are," insisted Majikthise. "We are quite definitely here as 
representatives of the Amalgamated Union of Philosophers, Sages, 
Luminaries and Other Thinking Persons, and we want this machine off, 
and we want it off now " 
"What's the problem?" said Lunkwill. 
"I'll tell you what the problem is mate," said Majikthise, 
"demarcation, that's the problem " 
"We demand," yelled Vroomfondel, "that demarcation may or may 
not be the problem " 
"You just let the machines get on with the adding up," warned 
Majikthise, "and we'll take care of the eternal verities thank you very 
much. You want to check your legal position you do mate. Under law 
the Quest for Ultimate Truth is quite clearly the inalienable 
prerogative of your working thinkers. Any bloody machine goes and 
actually finds it and we're straight out of a job aren't we? I mean 
what's the use of our sitting up half the night arguing that there may 
or may not be a God if this machine only goes and gives us his 
bleeding phone number the next morning?" 
"That's right " shouted Vroomfondel, "we demand rigidly defined 
areas of doubt and uncertainty " 
Suddenly a stentorian voice boomed across the room. 
"Might I make an observation at this point?" inquired Deep 
Thought. 
"We'll go on strike " yelled Vroomfondel. 
"That's right " agreed Majikthise. "You'll have a national 
Philosopher's strike on your hands " 
The hum level in the room suddenly increased as several ancillary 
bass driver units, mounted in sedately carved and varnished cabinet 
speakers around the room, cut in to give Deep Thought's voice a little 
more power. 
"All I wanted to say," bellowed the computer, "is that my circuits 
are now irrevocably committed to calculating the answer to the 
Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything ʹ " he paused 
and satisfied himself that he now had everyone's attention, before 
continuing more quietly, "but the programme will take me a little 
while to run." 
Fook glanced impatiently at his watch. 
"How long?" he said. 
"Seven and a half million years," said Deep Thought. 
Lunkwill and Fook blinked at each other. 
"Seven and a half million years... " they cried in chorus. 
"Yes," declaimed Deep Thought, "I said I'd have to think about it, 
didn't I? And it occurs to me that running a programme like this is 
bound to create an enormous amount of popular publicity for the 
whole area of philosophy in general. Everyone's going to have their 
own theories about what answer I'm eventually to come up with, and 
who better to capitalize on that media market than you yourself? So 
long as you can keep disagreeing with each other violently enough 
and slagging each other off in the popular press, you can keep 
yourself on the gravy train for life. How does that sound?" 
The two philosophers gaped at him. 
"Bloody hell," said Majikthise, "now that is what I call thinking. 
Here Vroomfondel, why do we never think of things like that?" 
"Dunno," said Vroomfondel in an awed whisper, "think our brains 
must be too highly trained Majikthise." 
So saying, they turned on their heels and walked out of the door 
and into a lifestyle beyond their wildest dreams. 
Chapter 26
"Yes, very salutary," said Arthur, after Slartibartfast had related the 
salient points of the story to him, "but I don't understand what all this 
has got to do with the Earth and mice and things." 
"That is but the first half of the story Earthman," said the old man. 
"If you would care to discover what happened seven and a half 
millions later, on the great day of the Answer, allow me to invite you 
to my study where you can experience the events yourself on our 
Sens`O`Tape records. That is unless you would care to take a quick 
stroll on the surface of New Earth. It's only half completed I'm afraid ʹ
we haven't even finished burying the artificial dinosaur skeletons in 
the crust yet, then we have the Tertiary and Quarternary Periods of 
the Cenozoic Era to lay down, and..." 
"No thank you," said Arthur, "it wouldn't be quite the same." 
"No," said Slartibartfast, "it won't be," and he turned the aircar 
round and headed back towards the mind`numbing wall. 
Chapter 27
Slartibartfast's study was a total mess, like the results of an 
explosion in a public library. The old man frowned as they stepped in. 
"Terribly unfortunate," he said, "a diode blew in one of the life`
support computers. When we tried to revive our cleaning staff we 
discovered they'd been dead for nearly thirty thousand years. Who's 
going to clear away the bodies, that's what I want to know. Look why 
don't you sit yourself down over there and let me plug you in?" 
He gestured Arthur towards a chair which looked as if it had been 
made out of the rib cage of a stegosaurus. 
"It was made out of the rib cage of a stegosaurus," explained the 
old man as he pottered about fishing bits of wire out from under 
tottering piles of paper and drawing instruments. "Here," he said, 
"hold these," and passed a couple of stripped wire end to Arthur. 
The instant he took hold of them a bird flew straight through him. 
He was suspended in mid`air and totally invisible to himself. 
Beneath him was a pretty treelined city square, and all around it as 
far as the eye could see were white concrete buildings of airy 
spacious design but somewhat the worse for wear ʹ many were 
cracked and stained with rain. Today however the sun was shining, a 
fresh breeze danced lightly through the trees, and the odd sensation 
that all the buildings were quietly humming was probably caused by 
the fact that the square and all the streets around it were thronged 
with cheerful excited people. Somewhere a band was playing, brightly 
coloured flags were fluttering in the breeze and the spirit of carnival 
was in the air. 
Arthur felt extraordinarily lonely stuck up in the air above it all 
without so much as a body to his name, but before he had time to 
reflect on this a voice rang out across the square and called for 
everyone's attention. 
A man standing on a brightly dressed dais before the building 
which clearly dominated the square was addressing the crowd over a 
Tannoy. 
"O people waiting in the Shadow of Deep Thought " he cried out. 
"Honoured Descendants of Vroomfondel and Majikthise, the Greatest 
and Most Truly Interesting Pundits the Universe has ever known... The 
Time of Waiting is over " 
Wild cheers broke out amongst the crowd. Flags, streamers and 
wolf whistles sailed through the air. The narrower streets looked 
rather like centipedes rolled over on their backs and frantically waving 
their legs in the air. 
"Seven and a half million years our race has waited for this Great 
and Hopefully Enlightening Day " cried the cheer leader. "The Day of 
the Answer " 
Hurrahs burst from the ecstatic crowd. 
"Never again," cried the man, "never again will we wake up in the 
morning and think Who am I? What is my purpose in life? Does it 
really, cosmically speaking, matter if I don't get up and go to work? 
For today we will finally learn once and for all the plain and simple 
answer to all these nagging little problems of Life, the Universe and 
Everything " 
As the crowd erupted once again, Arthur found himself gliding 
through the air and down towards one of the large stately windows 
on the first floor of the building behind the dais from which the 
speaker was addressing the crowd. 
He experienced a moment's panic as he sailed straight through 
towards the window, which passed when a second or so later he 
found he had gone right through the solid glass without apparently 
touching it. 
No one in the room remarked on his peculiar arrival, which is 
hardly surprising as he wasn't there. He began to realize that the 
whole experience was merely a recorded projection which knocked 
six`track seventy`millimetre into a cocked hat. 
The room was much as Slartibartfast had described it. In seven and 
a half million years it had been well looked after and cleaned regularly 
every century or so. The ultramahagony desk was worn at the edges, 
the carpet a little faded now, but the large computer terminal sat in 
sparkling glory on the desk's leather top, as bright as if it had been 
constructed yesterday. 
Two severely dressed men sat respectfully before the terminal and 
waited. 
"The time is nearly upon us," said one, and Arthur was surprised to 
see a word suddenly materialize in thin air just by the man's neck. The 
word was Loonquawl, and it flashed a couple of times and the 
disappeared again. Before Arthur was able to assimilate this the other 
man spoke and the word Phouchg appeared by his neck. 
"Seventy`five thousand generations ago, our ancestors set this 
program in motion," the second man said, "and in all that time we will 
be the first to hear the computer speak." 
"An awesome prospect, Phouchg," agreed the first man, and Arthur 
suddenly realized that he was watching a recording with subtitles. 
"We are the ones who will hear," said Phouchg, "the answer to the 
great question of Life... " 
"The Universe... " said Loonquawl. 
"And Everything... " 
"Shhh," said Loonquawl with a slight gesture, "I think Deep Thought 
is preparing to speak " 
There was a moment's expectant pause whilst panels slowly came 
to life on the front of the console. Lights flashed on and off 
experimentally and settled down into a businesslike pattern. A soft 
low hum came from the communication channel. 
"Good morning," said Deep Thought at last. 
"Er... Good morning, O Deep Thought," said Loonquawl nervously, 
"do you have... er, that is..." 
"An answer for you?" interrupted Deep Thought majestically. "Yes. 
I have." 
The two men shivered with expectancy. Their waiting had not been 
in vain. 
"There really is one?" breathed Phouchg. 
"There really is one," confirmed Deep Thought. 
"To Everything? To the great Question of Life, the Universe and 
Everything?" 
"Yes." 
Both of the men had been trained for this moment, their lives had 
been a preparation for it, they had been selected at birth as those 
who would witness the answer, but even so they found themselves 
gasping and squirming like excited children. 
"And you're ready to give it to us?" urged Loonquawl. 
"I am." 
"Now?" 
"Now," said Deep Thought. 
They both licked their dry lips. 
"Though I don't think," added Deep Thought, "that you're going to 
like it." 
"Doesn't matter " said Phouchg. "We must know it  Now " 
"Now?" inquired Deep Thought. 
"Yes  Now..." 
"Alright," said the computer and settled into silence again. The two 
men fidgeted. The tension was unbearable. 
"You're really not going to like it," observed Deep Thought. 
"Tell us " 
"Alright," said Deep Thought. "The Answer to the Great 
Question..." 
"Yes... " 
"Of Life, the Universe and Everything..." said Deep Thought. 
"Yes... " 
"Is..." said Deep Thought, and paused. 
"Yes... " 
"Is..." 
"Yes...   ...?" 
"Forty`two," said Deep Thought, with infinite majesty and calm. 
Chapter 28
It was a long time before anyone spoke. 
Out of the corner of his eye Phouchg could see the sea of tense 
expectant faces down in the square outside. 
"We're going to get lynched aren't we?" he whispered. 
"It was a tough assignment," said Deep Thought mildly. 
"Forty`two " yelled Loonquawl. "Is that all you've got to show for 
seven and a half million years' work?" 
"I checked it very thoroughly," said the computer, "and that quite 
definitely is the answer. I think the problem, to be quite honest with 
you, is that you've never actually known what the question is." 
"But it was the Great Question  The Ultimate Question of Life, the 
Universe and Everything " howled Loonquawl. 
"Yes," said Deep Thought with the air of one who suffers fools 
gladly, "but what actually is it?" 
A slow stupefied silence crept over the men as they stared at the 
computer and then at each other. 
"Well, you know, it's just Everything... Everything..." offered 
Phouchg weakly. 
"Exactly " said Deep Thought. "So once you do know what the 
question actually is, you'll know what the answer means." 
"Oh terrific," muttered Phouchg flinging aside his notebook and 
wiping away a tiny tear. 
"Look, alright, alright," said Loonquawl, "can you just please tell us 
the Question?" 
"The Ultimate Question?" 
"Yes " 
"Of Life, the Universe, and Everything?" 
"Yes " 
Deep Thought pondered this for a moment. 
"Tricky," he said. 
"But can you do it?" cried Loonquawl. 
Deep Thought pondered this for another long moment. 
Finally: "No," he said firmly. 
Both men collapsed on to their chairs in despair. 
"But I'll tell you who can," said Deep Thought. 
They both looked up sharply. 
"Who?" "Tell us " 
Suddenly Arthur began to feel his apparently non`existent scalp 
begin to crawl as he found himself moving slowly but inexorably 
forward towards the console, but it was only a dramatic zoom on the 
part of whoever had made the recording he assumed. 
"I speak of none other than the computer that is to come after 
me," intoned Deep Thought, his voice regaining its accustomed 
declamatory tones. "A computer whose merest operational 
parameters I am not worthy to calculate ʹ and yet I will design it for 
you. A computer which can calculate the Question to the Ultimate 
Answer, a computer of such infinite and subtle complexity that 
organic life itself shall form part of its operational matrix. And you 
yourselves shall take on new forms and go down into the computer to 
navigate its ten`million`year program  Yes  I shall design this 
computer for you. And I shall name it also unto you. And it shall be 
called... The Earth." 
Phouchg gaped at Deep Thought. 
"What a dull name," he said and great incisions appeared down the 
length of his body. Loonquawl too suddenly sustained horrific gashed 
from nowhere. The Computer console blotched and cracked, the walls 
flickered and crumbled and the room crashed upwards into its own 
ceiling... 
Slartibartfast was standing in front of Arthur holding the two wires. 
"End of the tape," he explained. 
Chapter 29
"Zaphod  Wake up " 
"Mmmmmwwwwwerrrrr?" 
"Hey come on, wake up." 
"Just let me stick to what I'm good at, yeah?" muttered Zaphod and 
rolled away from the voice back to sleep. 
"Do you want me to kick you?" said Ford. 
"Would it give you a lot of pleasure?" said Zaphod, blearily. 
"No." 
"Nor me. So what's the point? Stop bugging me." Zaphod curled 
himself up. 
"He got a double dose of the gas," said Trillian looking down at him,
"two windpipes." 
"And stop talking," said Zaphod, "it's hard enough trying to sleep 
anyway. What's the matter with the ground? It's all cold and hard." 
"It's gold," said Ford. 
With an amazingly balletic movement Zaphod was standing and 
scanning the horizon, because that was how far the gold ground 
stretched in every direction, perfectly smooth and solid. It gleamed 
like... it's impossible to say what it gleamed like because nothing in 
the Universe gleams in quite the same way that a planet of solid gold 
does. 
"Who put all that there?" yelped Zaphod, goggle`eyed. 
"Don't get excited," said Ford, "it's only a catalogue." 
"A who?" 
"A catalogue," said Trillian, "an illusion." 
"How can you say that?" cried Zaphod, falling to his hands and 
knees and staring at the ground. He poked it and prodded it with his 
fingernail. It was very heavy and very slightly soft ʹ he could mark it 
with his fingernail. It was very yellow and very shiny, and when he 
breathed on it his breath evaporated off it in that very peculiar and 
special way that breath evaporates off solid gold. 
"Trillian and I came round a while ago," said Ford. "We shouted 
and yelled till somebody came and then carried on shouting and 
yelling till they got fed up and put us in their planet catalogue to keep 
us busy till they were ready to deal with us. This is all Sens`O`Tape." 
Zaphod stared at him bitterly. 
"Ah, shit," he said, "you wake me up from my own perfectly good 
dream to show me somebody else's." He sat down in a huff. 
"What's that series of valleys over there?" he said. 
"Hallmark," said Ford. "We had a look." 
"We didn't wake you earlier," said Trillian. "The last planet was 
knee deep in fish." 
"Fish?" 
"Some people like the oddest things." 
"And before that," said Ford, "we had platinum. Bit dull. We 
thought you'd like to see this one though." 
Seas of light glared at them in one solid blaze wherever they looked. 
"Very pretty," said Zaphod petulantly. 
In the sky a huge green catalogue number appeared. It flickered 
and changed, and when they looked around again so had the land. 
As with one voice they all went, "Yuch." 
The sea was purple. The beach they were on was composed of tiny 
yellow and green pebbles ʹ presumably terribly precious stones. The 
mountains in the distance seemed soft and undulating with red peaks. 
Nearby stood a solid silver beach table with a frilly mauve parasol and 
silver tassles. 
In the sky a huge sign appeared, replacing the catalogue number. It 
said, Whatever your tastes, Magrathea can cater for you. We are not 
proud. 
And five hundred entirely naked women dropped out of the sky on 
parachutes. 
In a moment the scene vanished and left them in a springtime 
meadow full of cows. 
"Ow " said Zaphod. "My brains " 
"You want to talk about it?" said Ford. 
"Yeah, OK," said Zaphod, and all three sat down and ignored the 
scenes that came and went around them. 
"I figure this," said Zaphod. "Whatever happened to my mind, I did 
it. And I did it in such a way that it wouldn't be detected by the 
government screening tests. And I wasn't to know anything about it 
myself. Pretty crazy, right?" 
The other two nodded in agreement. 
"So I reckon, what's so secret that I can't let anybody know I know 
it, not the Galactic Government, not even myself? And the answer is I 
don't know. Obviously. But I put a few things together and I can begin 
to guess. When did I decide to run for President? Shortly after the 
death of President Yooden Vranx. You remember Yooden, Ford?" 
"Yeah," said Ford, "he was that guy we met when we were kids, the 
Arcturan captain. He was a gas. He gave us conkers when you bust 
your way into his megafreighter. Said you were the most amazing kid 
he'd ever met." 
"What's all this?" said Trillian. 
"Ancient history," said Ford, "when we were kids together on 
Betelgeuse. The Arcturan megafreighters used to carry most of the 
bulky trade between the Galactic Centre and the outlying regions The 
Betelgeuse trading scouts used to find the markets and the Arcturans 
would supply them. There was a lot of trouble with space pirates 
before they were wiped out in the Dordellis wars, and the 
megafreighters had to be equipped with the most fantastic defence 
shields known to Galactic science. They were real brutes of ships, and 
huge. In orbit round a planet they would eclipse the sun. 
"One day, young Zaphod here decides to raid one. On a tri`jet 
scooter designed for stratosphere work, a mere kid. I mean forget it, 
it was crazier than a mad monkey. I went along for the ride because 
I'd got some very safe money on him not doing it, and didn't want him 
coming back with fake evidence. So what happens? We got in his tri`
jet which he had souped up into something totally other, crossed 
three parsecs in a matter of weeks, bust our way into a megafreighter 
I still don't know how, marched on to the bridge waving toy pistols 
and demanded conkers. A wilder thing I have not known. Lost me a 
year's pocket money. For what? Conkers." 
"The captain was this really amazing guy, Yooden Vranx," said 
Zaphod. "He gave us food, booze ʹ stuff from really weird parts of the 
Galaxy ʹ lots of conkers of course, and we had just the most 
incredible time. Then he teleported us back. Into the maximum 
security wing of Betelgeuse state prison. He was a cool guy. Went on 
to become President of the Galaxy." 
Zaphod paused. 
The scene around them was currently plunged into gloom. Dark 
mists swirled round them and elephantine shapes lurked indistinctly 
in the shadows. The air was occasionally rent with the sounds of 
illusory beings murdering other illusory beings. Presumably enough 
people must have liked this sort of thing to make it a paying 
proposition. 
"Ford," said Zaphod quietly. 
"Yeah?" 
"Just before Yooden died he came to see me." 
"What? You never told me." 
"No." 
"What did he say? What did he come to see you about?" 
"He told me about the Heart of Gold. It was his idea that I should 
steal it." 
"His idea?" 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "and the only possible way of stealing it was 
to be at the launching ceremony." 
Ford gaped at him in astonishment for a moment, and then roared 
with laughter. 
"Are you telling me," he said, "that you set yourself up to become 
President of the Galaxy just to steal that ship?" 
"That's it," said Zaphod with the sort of grin that would get most 
people locked away in a room with soft walls. 
"But why?" said Ford. "What's so important about having it?" 
"Dunno," said Zaphod, "I think if I'd consciously known what was so 
important about it and what I would need it for it would have showed 
up on the brain screening tests and I would never have passed. I think 
Yooden told me a lot of things that are still locked away." 
"So you think you went and mucked about inside your own brain as 
a result of Yooden talking to you?" 
"He was a hell of a talker." 
"Yeah, but Zaphod old mate, you want to look after yourself you 
know." 
Zaphod shrugged. 
"I mean, don't you have any inkling of the reasons for all this?" 
asked Ford. 
Zaphod thought hard about this and doubts seemed to cross his 
minds. 
"No," he said at last, "I don't seem to be letting myself into any of 
my secrets. Still," he added on further reflection, "I can understand 
that. I wouldn't trust myself further than I could spit a rat." 
A moment later, the last planet in the catalogue vanished from 
beneath them and the solid world resolved itself again. 
They were sitting in a plush waiting room full of glass`top tables 
and design awards. 
A tall Magrathean man was standing in front of them. 
"The mice will see you now," he said. 
Chapter 30
"So there you have it," said Slartibartfast, making a feeble and 
perfunctory attempt to clear away some of the appalling mess of his 
study. He picked up a paper from the top of a pile, but then couldn't 
think of anywhere else to put it, so he but it back on top of the 
original pile which promptly fell over. "Deep Thought designed the 
Earth, we built it and you lived on it." 
"And the Vogons came and destroyed it five minutes before the 
program was completed," added Arthur, not unbitterly. 
"Yes," said the old man, pausing to gaze hopelessly round the room. 
"Ten million years of planning and work gone just like that. Ten 
million years, Earthman... can you conceive of that kind of time span? 
A galactic civilization could grow from a single worm five times over in 
that time. Gone." He paused. 
"Well that's bureaucracy for you," he added. 
"You know," said Arthur thoughtfully, "all this explains a lot of 
things. All through my life I've had this strange unaccountable feeling 
that something was going on in the world, something big, even 
sinister, and no one would tell me what it was." 
"No," said the old man, "that's just perfectly normal paranoia. 
Everyone in the Universe has that." 
"Everyone?" said Arthur. "Well, if everyone has that perhaps it 
means something  Perhaps somewhere outside the Universe we 
know..." 
"Maybe. Who cares?" said Slartibartfast before Arthur got too 
excited. "Perhaps I'm old and tired," he continued, "but I always think 
that the chances of finding out what really is going on are so absurdly 
remote that the only thing to do is to say hang the sense of it and just 
keep yourself occupied. Look at me: I design coastlines. I got an award 
for Norway." 
He rummaged around in a pile of debris and pulled out a large 
perspex block with his name on it and a model of Norway moulded 
into it. 
"Where's the sense in that?" he said. "None that I've been able to 
make out. I've been doing fjords in all my life. For a fleeting moment 
they become fashionable and I get a major award." 
He turned it over in his hands with a shrug and tossed it aside 
carelessly, but not so carelessly that it didn't land on something soft. 
"In this replacement Earth we're building they've given me Africa to 
do and of course I'm doing it with all fjords again because I happen to 
like them, and I'm old fashioned enough to think that they give a 
lovely baroque feel to a continent. And they tell me it's not equatorial 
enough. Equatorial " He gave a hollow laugh. "What does it matter? 
Science has achieved some wonderful things of course, but I'd far 
rather be happy than right any day." 
"And are you?" 
"No. That's where it all falls down of course." 
"Pity," said Arthur with sympathy. "It sounded like quite a good 
lifestyle otherwise." 
Somewhere on the wall a small white light flashed. 
"Come," said Slartibartfast, "you are to meet the mice. Your arrival 
on the planet has caused considerable excitement. It has already 
been hailed, so I gather, as the third most improbable event in the 
history of the Universe." 
"What were the first two?" 
"Oh, probably just coincidences," said Slartibartfast carelessly. He 
opened the door and stood waiting for Arthur to follow. 
Arthur glanced around him once more, and then down at himself, 
at the sweaty dishevelled clothes he had been lying in the mud in on 
Thursday morning. 
"I seem to be having tremendous difficulty with my lifestyle," he 
muttered to himself. 
"I beg your pardon?" said the old man mildly. 
"Oh nothing," said Arthur, "only joking." 
Chapter 31
It is of course well known that careless talk costs lives, but the full 
scale of the problem is not always appreciated. 
For instance, at the very moment that Arthur said "I seem to be 
having tremendous difficulty with my lifestyle," a freak wormhole 
opened up in the fabric of the space`time continuum and carried his 
words far far back in time across almost infinite reaches of space to a 
distant Galaxy where strange and warlike beings were poised on the 
brink of frightful interstellar battle. 
The two opposing leaders were meeting for the last time. 
A dreadful silence fell across the conference table as the 
commander of the Vl'hurgs, resplendent in his black jewelled battle 
shorts, gazed levelly at the G'Gugvuntt leader squatting opposite him 
in a cloud of green sweet`smelling steam, and, with a million sleek 
and horribly beweaponed star cruisers poised to unleash electric 
death at his single word of command, challenged the vile creature to 
take back what it had said about his mother. 
The creature stirred in his sickly broiling vapour, and at that very 
moment the words I seem to be having tremendous difficulty with my 
lifestyle drifted across the conference table. 
Unfortunately, in the Vl'hurg tongue this was the most dreadful 
insult imaginable, and there was nothing for it but to wage terrible 
war for centuries. 
Eventually of course, after their Galaxy had been decimated over a 
few thousand years, it was realized that the whole thing had been a 
ghastly mistake, and so the two opposing battle fleets settled their 
few remaining differences in order to launch a joint attack on our own 
Galaxy ʹ now positively identified as the source of the offending 
remark. 
For thousands more years the mighty ships tore across the empty 
wastes of space and finally dived screaming on to the first planet they 
came across ʹ which happened to be the Earth ʹ where due to a 
terrible miscalculation of scale the entire battle fleet was accidentally 
swallowed by a small dog. 
Those who study the complex interplay of cause and effect in the 
history of the Universe say that this sort of thing is going on all the 
time, but that we are powerless to prevent it. 
"It's just life," they say. 
A short aircar trip brought Arthur and the old Magrathean to a 
doorway. They left the car and went through the door into a waiting 
room full of glass`topped tables and perspex awards. Almost 
immediately, a light flashed above the door at the other side of the 
room and they entered. 
"Arthur  You're safe " a voice cried. 
"Am I?" said Arthur, rather startled. "Oh good." 
The lighting was rather subdued and it took him a moment or so to 
see Ford, Trillian and Zaphod sitting round a large table beautifully 
decked out with exotic dishes, strange sweetmeats and bizarre fruits. 
They were stuffing their faces. 
"What happened to you?" demanded Arthur. 
"Well," said Zaphod, attacking a boneful of grilled muscle, "our 
hosts here have been gassing us and zapping our minds and being 
generally weird and have now given us a rather nice meal to make it 
up to us. Here," he said hoiking out a lump of evil smelling meat from 
a bowl, "have some Vegan Rhino's cutlet. It's delicious if you happen 
to like that sort of thing." 
"Hosts?" said Arthur. "What hosts? I don't see any..." 
A small voice said, "Welcome to lunch, Earth creature." 
Arthur glanced around and suddenly yelped. 
"Ugh " he said. "There are mice on the table " 
There was an awkward silence as everyone looked pointedly at 
Arthur. 
He was busy staring at two white mice sitting in what looked like 
whisky glasses on the table. He heard the silence and glanced around 
at everyone. 
"Oh " he said, with sudden realization. "Oh, I'm sorry, I wasn't quite 
prepared for..." 
"Let me introduce you," said Trillian. "Arthur this is Benji mouse." 
"Hi," said one of the mice. His whiskers stroked what must have 
been a touch sensitive panel on the inside of the whisky`glass like 
affair, and it moved forward slightly. 
"And this is Frankie mouse." 
The other mouse said, "Pleased to meet you," and did likewise. 
Arthur gaped. 
"But aren't they..." 
"Yes," said Trillian, "they are the mice I brought with me from the 
Earth." 
She looked him in the eye and Arthur thought he detected the 
tiniest resigned shrug. 
"Could you pass me that bowl of grated Arcturan Megadonkey?" 
she said. 
Slartibartfast coughed politely. 
"Er, excuse me," he said. 
"Yes, thank you Slartibartfast," said Benji mouse sharply, "you may 
go." 
"What? Oh... er, very well," said the old man, slightly taken aback, 
"I'll just go and get on with some of my fjords then." 
"Ah, well in fact that won't be necessary," said Frankie mouse. "It 
looks very much as if we won't be needing the new Earth any longer." 
He swivelled his pink little eyes. "Not now that we have found a 
native of the planet who was there seconds before it was destroyed." 
"What?" cried Slartibartfast, aghast. "You can't mean that  I've got 
a thousand glaciers poised and ready to roll over Africa " 
"Well perhaps you can take a quick skiing holiday before you 
dismantle them," said Frankie, acidly. 
"Skiing holiday " cried the old man. "Those glaciers are works of art  
Elegantly sculptured contours, soaring pinnacles of ice, deep majestic
ravines  It would be sacrilege to go skiing on high art " 
"Thank you Slartibartfast," said Benji firmly. "That will be all." 
"Yes sir," said the old man coldly, "thank you very much. Well, 
goodbye Earthman," he said to Arthur, "hope the lifestyle comes 
together." 
With a brief nod to the rest of the company he turned and walked 
sadly out of the room. 
Arthur stared after him not knowing what to say. 
"Now," said Benji mouse, "to business." 
Ford and Zaphod clinked their glasses together. 
"To business " they said. 
"I beg your pardon?" said Benji. 
Ford looked round. 
"Sorry, I thought you were proposing a toast," he said. 
The two mice scuttled impatiently around in their glass transports. 
Finally they composed themselves, and Benji moved forward to 
address Arthur. 
"Now, Earth creature," he said, "the situation we have in effect is 
this. We have, as you know, been more or less running your planet for 
the last ten million years in order to find this wretched thing called 
the Ultimate Question." 
"Why?" said Arthur, sharply. 
"No ʹ we already thought of that one," said Frankie interrupting, 
"but it doesn't fit the answer. Why? Forty`Two... you see, it doesn't 
work." 
"No," said Arthur, "I mean why have you been doing it?" 
"Oh, I see," said Frankie. "Well, eventually just habit I think, to be 
brutally honest. And this is more or less the point ʹ we're sick to the 
teeth with the whole thing, and the prospect of doing it all over again 
on account of those whinnet`ridden Vogons quite frankly gives me 
the screaming heeby jeebies, you know what I mean? It was by the 
merest lucky chance that Benji and I finished our particular job and 
left the planet early for a quick holiday, and have since manipulated 
our way back to Magrathea by the good offices of your friends." 
"Magrathea is a gateway back to our own dimension," put in Benji. 
"Since when," continued his murine colleague, "we have had an 
offer of a quite enormously fat contract to do the 5D chat show and 
lecture circuit back in our own dimensional neck of the woods, and 
we're very much inclined to take it." 
"I would, wouldn't you Ford?" said Zaphod promptingly. 
"Oh yes," said Ford, "jump at it, like a shot." 
Arthur glanced at them, wondering what all this was leading up to. 
"But we've got to have a product you see," said Frankie, "I mean 
ideally we still need the Ultimate Question in some form or other." 
Zaphod leaned forward to Arthur. 
"You see," he said, "if they're just sitting there in the studio looking 
very relaxed and, you know, just mentioning that they happen to 
know the Answer to Life, the Universe and Everything, and then 
eventually have to admit that in fact it's Forty`two, then the show's 
probably quite short. No follow`up, you see." 
"We have to have something that sounds good," said Benji. 
"Something that sounds good?" exclaimed Arthur. "An Ultimate 
Question that sounds good? From a couple of mice?" 
The mice bristled. 
"Well, I mean, yes idealism, yes the dignity of pure research, yes 
the pursuit of truth in all its forms, but there comes a point I'm afraid 
where you begin to suspect that if there's any real truth, it's that the 
entire multi`dimensional infinity of the Universe is almost certainly 
being run by a bunch of maniacs. And if it comes to a choice between 
spending yet another ten million years finding that out, and on the 
other hand just taking the money and running, then I for one could do 
with the exercise," said Frankie. 
"But..." started Arthur, hopelessly. 
"Hey, will you get this, Earthman," interrupted Zaphod. "You are a 
last generation product of that computer matrix, right, and you were 
there right up to the moment your planet got the finger, yeah?" 
"Er..." 
"So your brain was an organic part of the penultimate 
configuration of the computer programme," said Ford, rather lucidly 
he thought. 
"Right?" said Zaphod. 
"Well," said Arthur doubtfully. He wasn't aware of ever having felt 
an organic part of anything. He had always seen this as one of his 
problems. 
"In other words," said Benji, steering his curious little vehicle right 
over to Arthur, "there's a good chance that the structure of the 
question is encoded in the structure of your brain ʹ so we want to buy 
it off you." 
"What, the question?" said Arthur. 
"Yes," said Ford and Trillian. 
"For lots of money," said Zaphod. 
"No, no," said Frankie, "it's the brain we want to buy." 
"What " 
"I thought you said you could just read his brain electronically," 
protested Ford. 
"Oh yes," said Frankie, "but we'd have to get it out first. It's got to 
be prepared." 
"Treated," said Benji. 
"Diced." 
"Thank you," shouted Arthur, tipping up his chair and backing away 
from the table in horror. 
"It could always be replaced," said Benji reasonably, "if you think 
it's important." 
"Yes, an electronic brain," said Frankie, "a simple one would 
suffice." 
"A simple one " wailed Arthur. 
"Yeah," said Zaphod with a sudden evil grin, "you'd just have to 
program it to say What? and I don't understand and Where's the tea? 
who'd know the difference?" 
"What?" cried Arthur, backing away still further. 
"See what I mean?" said Zaphod and howled with pain because of 
something that Trillian did at that moment. 
"I'd notice the difference," said Arthur. 
"No you wouldn't," said Frankie mouse, "you'd be programmed not 
to." 
Ford made for the door. 
"Look, I'm sorry, mice old lads," he said. "I don't think we've got a 
deal." 
"I rather think we have to have a deal," said the mice in chorus, all 
the charm vanishing fro their piping little voices in an instant. With a 
tiny whining shriek their two glass transports lifted themselves off the 
table, and swung through the air towards Arthur, who stumbled 
further backwards into a blind corner, utterly unable to cope or think 
of anything. 
Trillian grabbed him desperately by the arm and tried to drag him 
towards the door, which Ford and Zaphod were struggling to open, 
but Arthur was dead weight ʹ he seemed hypnotized by the airborne 
rodents swooping towards him. 
She screamed at him, but he just gaped. 
With one more yank, Ford and Zaphod got the door open. On the 
other side of it was a small pack of rather ugly men who they could 
only assume were the heavy mob of Magrathea. Not only were they 
ugly themselves, but the medical equipment they carried with them 
was also far from pretty. They charged. 
So ʹ Arthur was about to have his head cut open, Trillian was 
unable to help him, and Ford and Zaphod were about to be set upon 
by several thugs a great deal heavier and more sharply armed than 
they were. 
All in all it was extremely fortunate that at that moment every 
alarm on the planet burst into an earsplitting din. 
Chapter 32
"Emergency  Emergency " blared the klaxons throughout 
Magrathea. "Hostile ship has landed on planet. Armed intruders in 
section 8A. Defence stations, defence stations " 
The two mice sniffed irritably round the fragments of their glass 
transports where they lay shattered on the floor. 
"Damnation," muttered Frankie mouse, "all that fuss over two 
pounds of Earthling brain." He scuttled round and about, his pink eyes 
flashing, his fine white coat bristling with static. 
"The only thing we can do now," said Benji, crouching and stroking 
his whiskers in thought, "is to try and fake a question, invent one that 
will sound plausible." 
"Difficult," said Frankie. He thought. "How about What's yellow and 
dangerous?" 
Benji considered this for a moment. 
"No, no good," he said. "Doesn't fit the answer." 
They sank into silence for a few seconds. 
"Alright," said Benji. "What do you get if you multiply six by 
seven?" 
"No, no, too literal, too factual," said Frankie, "wouldn't sustain the 
punters' interest." 
Again they thought. 
Then Frankie said: "Here's a thought. How many roads must a man 
walk down?" 
"Ah," said Benji. "Aha, now that does sound promising " He rolled 
the phrase around a little. "Yes," he said, "that's excellent  Sounds 
very significant without actually tying you down to meaning anything 
at all. How many roads must a man walk down? Forty`two. Excellent, 
excellent, that'll fox 'em. Frankie baby, we are made " 
They performed a scampering dance in their excitement. 
Near them on the floor lay several rather ugly men who had been 
hit about the head with some heavy design awards. 
Half a mile away, four figures pounded up a corridor looking for a 
way out. They emerged into a wide open`plan computer bay. They 
glanced about wildly. 
"Which way do you reckon Zaphod?" said Ford. 
"At a wild guess, I'd say down here," said Zaphod, running off down 
to the right between a computer bank and the wall. As the others 
started after him he was brought up short by a Kill`O`Zap energy bolt 
that cracked through the air inches in front of him and fried a small 
section of adjacent wall. 
A voice on a loud hailer said, "OK Beeblebrox, hold it right there. 
We've got you covered." 
"Cops " hissed Zaphod, and span around in a crouch. "You want to 
try a guess at all, Ford?" 
"OK, this way," said Ford, and the four of them ran down a 
gangway between two computer banks. 
At the end of the gangway appeared a heavily armoured and 
space`suited figure waving a vicious Kill`O`Zap gun. 
"We don't want to shoot you, Beeblebrox " shouted the figure. 
"Suits me fine " shouted Zaphod back and dived down a wide gap 
between two data process units. 
The others swerved in behind him. 
"There are two of them," said Trillian. "We're cornered." 
They squeezed themselves down in an angle between a large 
computer data bank and the wall. 
They held their breath and waited. 
Suddenly the air exploded with energy bolts as both the cops 
opened fire on them simultaneously. 
"Hey, they're shooting at us," said Arthur, crouching in a tight ball, 
"I thought they said they didn't want to do that." 
"Yeah, I thought they said that," agreed Ford. 
Zaphod stuck a head up for a dangerous moment. 
"Hey," he said, "I thought you said you didn't want to shoot us " 
and ducked again. 
They waited. 
After a moment a voice replied, "It isn't easy being a cop " 
"What did he say?" whispered Ford in astonishment. 
"He said it isn't easy being a cop." 
"Well surely that's his problem isn't it?" 
"I'd have thought so." 
Ford shouted out, "Hey listen  I think we've got enough problems 
on our own having you shooting at us, so if you could avoid laying 
your problems on us as well, I think we'd all find it easier to cope " 
Another pause, and then the loud hailer again. 
"Now see here, guy," said the voice on the loud hailer, "you're not 
dealing with any dumb two`bit trigger`pumping morons with low 
hairlines, little piggy eyes and no conversation, we're a couple of 
intelligent caring guys that you'd probably quite like if you met us 
socially  I don't go around gratuitously shooting people and then 
bragging about it afterwards in seedy space`rangers bars, like some 
cops I could mention  I go around shooting people gratuitously and 
then I agonize about it afterwards for hours to my girlfriend " 
"And I write novels " chimed in the other cop. "Though I haven't 
had any of them published yet, so I better warn you, I'm in a meeeean 
mood " 
Ford's eyes popped halfway out of their sockets. "Who are these 
guys?" he said. 
"Dunno," said Zaphod, "I think I preferred it when they were 
shooting." 
"So are you going to come quietly," shouted one of the cops again, 
"or are you going to let us blast you out?" 
"Which would you prefer?" shouted Ford. 
A millisecond later the air about them started to fry again, as bolt 
after bolt of Kill`O`Zap hurled itself into the computer bank in front of 
them. 
The fusillade continued for several seconds at unbearable intensity. 
When it stopped, there were a few seconds of near quietness ad 
the echoes died away. 
"You still there?" called one of the cops. 
"Yes," they called back. 
"We didn't enjoy doing that at all," shouted the other cop. 
"We could tell," shouted Ford. 
"Now, listen to this, Beeblebrox, and you better listen good " 
"Why?" shouted Back Zaphod. 
"Because," shouted the cop, "it's going to be very intelligent, and 
quite interesting and humane  Now either you all give yourselves up 
now and let us beat you up a bit, though not very much of course 
because we are firmly opposed to needless violence, or we blow up 
this entire planet and possibly one or two others we noticed on our 
way out here " 
"But that's crazy " cried Trillian. "You wouldn't do that " 
"Oh yes we would," shouted the cop, "wouldn't we?" he asked the 
other one. 
"Oh yes, we'd have to, no question," the other one called back. 
"But why?" demanded Trillian. 
"Because there are some things you have to do even if you are an 
enlightened liberal cop who knows all about sensitivity and 
everything " 
"I just don't believe these guys," muttered Ford, shaking his head. 
One cop shouted to the other, "Shall we shoot them again for a 
bit?" 
"Yeah, why not?" 
They let fly another electric barrage. 
The heat and noise was quite fantastic. Slowly, the computer bank 
was beginning to disintegrate. The front had almost all melted away, 
and thick rivulets of molten metal were winding their way back 
towards where they were squatting. They huddled further back and 
waited for the end. 
Chapter 33
But the end never came, at least not then. 
Quite suddenly the barrage stopped, and the sudden silence 
afterwards was punctuated by a couple of strangled gurgles and thuds. 
The four stared at each other. 
"What happened?" said Arthur. 
"They stopped," said Zaphod with a shrug. 
"Why?" 
"Dunno, do you want to go and ask them?" 
"No." 
They waited. 
"Hello?" called out Ford. 
No answer. 
"That's odd." 
"Perhaps it's a trap." 
"They haven't the wit." 
"What were those thuds?" 
"Dunno." 
They waited for a few more seconds. 
"Right," said Ford, "I'm going to have a look." 
He glanced round at the others. 
"Is no one going to say, No you can't possibly, let me go instead?" 
They all shook their heads. 
"Oh well," he said, and stood up. 
For a moment, nothing happened. 
Then, after a second or so, nothing continued to happen. Ford 
peered through the thick smoke that was billowing out of the burning 
computer. 
Cautiously he stepped out into the open. 
Still nothing happened. 
Twenty yards away he could dimly see through the smoke the 
space`suited figure of one of the cops. He was lying in a crumpled 
heap on the ground. Twenty yards in the other direction lay the 
second man. No one else was anywhere to be seen. 
This struck Ford as being extremely odd. 
Slowly, nervously, he walked towards the first one. The body lay 
reassuringly still as he approached it, and continued to lie reassuringly 
still as he reached it and put his foot down on the Kill`O`Zap gun that 
still dangled from its limp fingers. 
He reached down and picked it up, meeting no resistance. 
The cop was quite clearly dead. 
A quick examination revealed him to be from Blagulon Kappa ʹ he 
was a methane`breathing life form, dependent on his space suit for 
survival in the thin oxygen atmosphere of Magrathea. 
The tiny life`support system computer on his backpack appeared 
unexpectedly to have blown up. 
Ford poked around in it in considerable astonishment. These 
miniature suit computers usually had the full back`up of the main 
computer back on the ship, with which they were directly linked 
through the sub`etha. Such a system was fail`safe in all circumstances 
other than total feedback malfunction, which was unheard of. 
He hurried over to the other prone figure, and discovered that 
exactly the same impossible thing had happened to him, presumably 
simultaneously. 
He called the others over to look. They came, shared his 
astonishment, but not his curiosity. 
"Let's get shot out of this hole," said Zaphod. "If whatever I'm 
supposed to be looking for is here, I don't want it." He grabbed the 
second Kill`O`Zap gun, blasted a perfectly harmless accounting 
computer and rushed out into the corridor, followed by the others. 
He very nearly blasted hell out of an aircar that stood waiting for 
them a few yards away. 
The aircar was empty, but Arthur recognized it as belonging to 
Slartibartfast. 
It had a note from him pinned to part of its sparse instrument 
panel. The note had an arrow drawn on it, pointing at one of the 
controls. 
It said, This is probably the best button to press. 
Chapter 34
The aircar rocketed them at speeds in excess of R17 through the 
steel tunnels that lead out onto the appalling surface of the planet 
which was now in the grip of yet another drear morning twilight. 
Ghastly grey lights congealed on the land.
R is a velocity measure, defined as a reasonable speed of travel 
that is consistent with health, mental wellbeing and not being more 
than say five minutes late. It is therefore clearly an almost infinitely 
variable figure according to circumstances, since the first two factors 
vary not only with speed taken as an absolute, but also with 
awareness of the third factor. Unless handled with tranquility this 
equation can result in considerable stress, ulcers and even death. 
R17 is not a fixed velocity, but it is clearly far too fast. 
The aircar flung itself through the air at R17 and above, deposited 
them next to the Heart of Gold which stood starkly on the frozen 
ground like a bleached bone, and then precipitately hurled itself back 
in the direction whence they had come, presumably on important 
business of its own. 
Shivering, the four of them stood and looked at the ship. 
Beside it stood another one. 
It was the Blagulon Kappa policecraft, a bulbous sharklike affair, 
slate green in colour and smothered with black stencilled letters of 
varying degrees of size and unfriendliness. The letters informed 
anyone who cared to read them as to where the ship was from, what 
section of the police it was assigned to, and where the power feeds 
should be connected. 
It seemed somehow unnaturally dark and silent, even for a ship 
whose two`man crew was at that moment lying asphyxicated in a 
smoke`filled chamber several miles beneath the ground. It is one of 
those curious things that is impossible to explain or define, but one 
can sense when a ship is completely dead. 
Ford could sense it and found it most mysterious ʹ a ship and two 
policemen seemed to have gone spontaneously dead. In his 
experience the Universe simply didn't work like that. 
The other three could sense it too, but they could sense the bitter 
cold even more and hurried back into the Heart of Gold suffering from 
an acute attack of no curiosity. 
Ford stayed, and went to examine the Blagulon ship. As he walked, 
he nearly tripped over an inert steel figure lying face down in the cold 
dust. 
"Marvin " he exclaimed. "What are you doing?" 
"Don't feel you have to take any notice of me, please," came a 
muffled drone. 
"But how are you, metalman?" said Ford. 
"Very depressed." 
"What's up?" 
"I don't know," said Marvin, "I've never been there." 
"Why," said Ford squatting down beside him and shivering, "are 
you lying face down in the dust?" 
"It's a very effective way of being wretched," said Marvin. "Don't 
pretend you want to talk to me, I know you hate me." 
"No I don't." 
"Yes you do, everybody does. It's part of the shape of the Universe. 
I only have to talk to somebody and they begin to hate me. Even 
robots hate me. If you just ignore me I expect I shall probably go 
away." 
He jacked himself up to his feet and stood resolutely facing the 
opposite direction. 
"That ship hated me," he said dejectedly, indicating the policecraft. 
"That ship?" said Ford in sudden excitement. "What happened to it? 
Do you know?" 
"It hated me because I talked to it." 
"You talked to it?" exclaimed Ford. "What do you mean you talked 
to it?" 
"Simple. I got very bored and depressed, so I went and plugged 
myself in to its external computer feed. I talked to the computer at 
great length and explained my view of the Universe to it," said Marvin. 
"And what happened?" pressed Ford. 
"It committed suicide," said Marvin and stalked off back to the 
Heart of Gold. 
Chapter 35
That night, as the Heart of Gold was busy putting a few light years 
between itself and the Horsehead Nebula, Zaphod lounged under the 
small palm tree on the bridge trying to bang his brain into shape with 
massive Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters; Ford and Trillian sat in a corner 
discussing life and matters arising from it; and Arthur took to his bed 
to flip through Ford's copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. 
Since he was going to live in the place, he reasoned, he'd better start 
finding out something about it. 
He came across this entry. 
It said: 'The History of every major Galactic Civilization tends to 
pass through three distinct and recognizable phases, those of Survival, 
Inquiry and Sophistication, otherwise known as the How, Why and 
Where phases." 
"For instance, the first phase is characterized by the question How 
can we eat? the second by the question Why do we eat? and the third 
by the question Where shall we have lunch?" 
He got no further before the ship's intercom buzzed into life. 
"Hey Earthman? You hungry kid?" said Zaphod's voice. 
"Er, well yes, a little peckish I suppose," said Arthur. 
"OK baby, hold tight," said Zaphod. "We'll take in a quick bite at the 
Restaurant at the End of the Universe." 
DOUGLAS ADAMS 
THE RESTAURANT AT THE
END OF THE UNIVERSE 
To Jane and James 
with many thanks 
to Geoffrey Perkins for achieving the Improbable 
to Paddy Kingsland, Lisa Braun and Alick Hale Munro for helping 
him 
to John Lloyd for his help with the original Milliways script 
to Simon Brett for starting the whole thing off 
to the Paul Simon album One Trick Pony which I played incessantly 
while writing this book. Five years is far too long 
And with very special thanks to Jacqui Graham for infinite patience, 
kindness and food in adversity 
There is a theory which states that if ever anyone discovers exactly 
what the Universe is for and why it is here, it will instantly disappear 
and be replaced by something even more bizarre and inexplicable. 
There is another theory which states that this has already 
happened. 
Chapter 1
The story so far: 
In the beginning the Universe was created. 
This has made a lot of people very angry and been widely regarded 
as a bad move. 
Many races believe that it was created by some sort of God, 
though the Jatravartid people of Viltvodle VI believe that the entire 
Universe was in fact sneezed out of the nose of a being called the 
Great Green Arkleseizure. 
The Jatravartids, who live in perpetual fear of the time they call The 
Coming of The Great White Handkerchief, are small blue creatures 
with more than fifty arms each, who are therefore unique in being the 
only race in history to have invented the aerosol deodorant before 
the wheel. 
However, the Great Green Arkleseizure Theory is not widely 
accepted outside Viltvodle VI and so, the Universe being the puzzling 
place it is, other explanations are constantly being sought. 
For instance, a race of hyperintelligent pan`dimensional beings 
once built themselves a gigantic supercomputer called Deep Thought 
to calculate once and for all the Answer to the Ultimate Question of 
Life, the Universe, and Everything. 
For seven and a half million years, Deep Thought computed and 
calculated, and in the end announced that the answer was in fact 
Forty`two`and so another, even bigger, computer had to be built to 
find out what the actual question was. 
And this computer, which was called the Earth, was so large that it 
was frequently mistaken for a planet ʹ especially by the strange ape`
like beings who roamed its surface, totally unaware that they were 
simply part of a gigantic computer program. 
And this is very odd, because without that fairly simple and obvious 
piece of knowledge, nothing that ever happened on the Earth could 
possibly make the slightest bit of sense. 
Sadly however, just before the critical moment of readout, the 
Earth was unexpectedly demolished by the Vogons to make way ʹ so 
they claimed ʹ for a new hyperspace bypass, and so all hope of 
discovering a meaning for life was lost for ever. 
Or so it would seem. 
Two of there strange, ape`like creatures survived. 
Arthur Dent escaped at the very last moment because an old friend 
of his, Ford Prefect, suddenly turned out to be from a small planet in 
the vicinity of Betelgeuse and not from Guildford as he had hitherto 
claimed; and, more to the point, he knew how to hitch rides on flying 
saucers. 
Tricia McMillian ʹ or Trillian ʹ had skipped the planet six months 
earlier with Zaphod Beeblebrox, the then President of the Galaxy. 
Two survivors. 
They are all that remains of the greatest experiment ever 
conducted ʹ to find the Ultimate Question and the Ultimate Answer 
of Life, the Universe, and Everything. 
And, less than half a million miles from where their starship is 
drifting lazily through the inky blackness of space, a Vogon ship is 
moving slowly towards them. 
Chapter 2
Like all Vogon ships it looked as if it had been not so much 
designed as congealed. The unpleasant yellow lumps and edifices 
which protuded from it at unsightly angles would have disfigured the 
looks of most ships, but in this case that was sadly impossible. Uglier 
things have been spotted in the skies, but not by reliable witnesses. 
In fact to see anything much uglier than a Vogon ship you would 
have to go inside and look at a Vogon. If you are wise, however, this is 
precisely what you will avoid doing because the average Vogon will 
not think twice before doing something so pointlessly hideous to you 
that you will wish you had never been born ʹ or (if you are a clearer 
minded thinker) that the Vogon had never been born. 
In fact, the average Vogon probably wouldn't even think once. They 
are simple`minded, thick`willed, slug`brained creatures, and thinking 
is not really something they are cut out for. Anatomical analysis of the 
Vogon reveals that its brain was originally a badly deformed, 
misplaced and dyspeptic liver. The fairest thing you can say about 
them, then, is that they know what they like, and what they like 
generally involves hurting people and, wherever possible, getting very 
angry. 
One thing they don't like is leaving a job unfinished ʹ particularly 
this Vogon, and particularly ʹ for various reasons ʹ this job. 
This Vogon was Captain Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz of the Galactic 
Hyperspace Planning Council, and he was it who had had the job of 
demolishing the so`called "planet" Earth. 
He heaved his monumentally vile body round in his ill`fitting, slimy 
seat and stared at the monitor screen on which the starship Heart of 
Gold was being systematically scanned. 
It mattered little to him that the Heart of Gold, with its Infinite 
Improbability Drive, was the most beautiful and revolutionary ship 
ever built. Aesthetics and technology were closed books to him and, 
had he had his way, burnt and buried books as well. 
It mattered even less to him that Zaphod Beeblebrox was aboard. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox was now the ex`President of the Galaxy, and 
though every police force in the Galaxy was currently pursuing both 
him and this ship he had stolen, the Vogon was not interested. 
He had other fish to fry. 
It has been said that Vogons are not above a little bribery and 
corruption in the same way that the sea is not above the clouds, and 
this was certainly true in his case. When he heard the words 
"integrity" or "moral rectitude", he reached for his dictionary, and 
when he heard the chink of ready money in large quantities he 
reached for the rule book and threw it away. 
In seeking so implacably the destruction of the Earth and all that 
therein lay he was moving somewhat above and beyond the call of his 
professional duty. There was even some doubt as to whether the said 
bypass was actually going to be built, but the matter had been 
glossed over. 
He grunted a repellent grunt of satisfaction. 
"Computer," he croaked, "get me my brain care specialist on the 
line." 
Within a few seconds the face of Gag Halfrunt appeared on the 
screen, smiling the smile of a man who knew he was ten light years 
away from the Vogon face he was looking at. Mixed up somewhere in 
the smile was a glint of irony too. Though the Vogon persistently 
referred to him as "my private brain care specialist" there was not a 
lot of brain to take care of, and it was in fact Halfrunt who was 
employing the Vogon. He was paying him an awful lot of money to do 
some very dirty work. As one of the Galaxy's most prominent and 
successful psychiatrists, he and a consortium of his colleagues were 
quite prepared to spend an awful lot of money when it seemed that 
the entire future of psychiatry might be at stake. 
"Well," he said, "hello my Captain of Vogons Prostetnic, and how 
are we feeling today?" 
The Vogon captain told him that in the last few hours he had wiped 
out nearly half his crew in a disciplinary exercise. 
Halfrunt's smile did not flicker for an instant. 
"Well," he said, "I think this is perfectly normal behaviour for a 
Vogon, you know? The natural and healthy channelling of the 
aggressive instincts into acts of senseless violence." 
"That," rumbled the Vogon, "is what you always say." 
"Well again," said Halfrunt, "I think that this is perfectly normal 
behaviour for a psychiatrist. Good. We are clearly both very well 
adjusted in our mental attitudes today. Now tell me, what news of 
the mission?" 
"We have located the ship." 
"Wonderful," said Halfrunt, "wonderful  and the occupants?" 
"The Earthman is there." 
"Excellent  And...?" 
"A female from the same planet. They are the last." 
"Good, good," beamed Halfrunt, "Who else?" 
"The man Prefect." 
"Yes?" 
"And Zaphod Beeblebrox." 
For an instant Halfrunt's smile flickered. 
"Ah yes," he said, "I had been expecting this. It is most 
regrettable." 
"A personal friend?" inquired the Vogon, who had heard the 
expression somewhere once and decided to try it out. 
"Ah, no," said Halfrunt, "in my profession you know, we do not 
make personal friends." 
"Ah," grunted the Vogon, "professional detachment." 
"No," said Halfrunt cheerfully, "we just don't have the knack." 
He paused. His mouth continued to smile, but his eyes frowned 
slightly. 
"But Beeblebrox, you know," he said, "he is one of my most 
profitable clients. He had personality problems beyond the dreams of 
analysts." 
He toyed with this thought a little before reluctantly dismissing it. 
"Still," he said, "you are ready for your task?" 
"Yes." 
"Good. Destroy the ship immediately." 
"What about Beeblebrox?" 
"Well," said Halfrunt brightly, "Zaphod's just this guy, you know?" 
He vanished from the screen. 
The Vogon Captain pressed a communicator button which 
connected him with the remains of his crew. 
"Attack," he said. 
At that precise moment Zaphod Beeblebrox was in his cabin 
swearing very loudly. Two hours ago, he had said that they would go 
for a quick bite at the Restaurant at the End of the Universe, 
whereupon he had had a blazing row with the ship's computer and 
stormed off to his cabin shouting that he would work out the 
Improbability factors with a pencil. 
The Heart of Gold's Improbability Drive made it the most powerful 
and unpredictable ship in existence. There was nothing it couldn't do, 
provided you knew exactly how improbable it was that the thing you 
wanted it to do would ever happen. 
He had stolen it when, as President, he was meant to be launching 
it. He didn't know exactly why he had stolen it, except that he liked it. 
He didn't know why he had become President of the Galaxy, except 
that it seemed a fun thing to be. 
He did know that there were better reasons than these, but that 
they were buried in a dark, locked off section of his two brains. He 
wished the dark, locked off section of his two brains would go away 
because they occasionally surfaced momentarily and put strange 
thoughts into the light, fun sections of his mind and tried to deflect 
him from what he saw as being the basic business of his life, which 
was to have a wonderfully good time. 
At the moment he was not having a wonderfully good time. He had 
run out of patience and pencils and was feeling very hungry. 
"Starpox " he shouted. 
At that same precise moment, Ford Prefect was in mid air. This was 
not because of anything wrong with the ship's artificial gravity field, 
but because he was leaping down the stair`well which led to the 
ship's personal cabins. It was a very high jump to do in one bound and 
he landed awkwardly, stumbled, recovered, raced down the corridor 
sending a couple of miniature service robots flying, skidded round the 
corner, burst into Zaphod's door and explained what was on his mind. 
"Vogons," he said. 
A short while before this, Arthur Dent had set out from his cabin in 
search of a cup of tea. It was not a quest he embarked upon with a 
great deal of optimism., because he knew that the only source of hot 
drinks on the entire ship was a benighted piece of equipment 
produced by the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation. It was called a Nutri`
Matic Drinks Synthesizer, and he had encountered it before. 
It claimed to produce the widest possible range of drinks personally 
matched to the tastes and metabolism of whoever cared to use it. 
When put to the test, however, it invariably produced a plastic cup 
filled with a liquid that was almost, but nit quite, entirely unlike tea. 
He attempted to reason with the thing. 
"Tea," he said. 
"Share and Enjoy," the machine replied and provided him with yet 
another cup of the sickly liquid. 
He threw it away. 
"Share and enjoy," the machine repeated and provided him with 
another one. 
"Share and Enjoy" is the company motto of the hugely successful 
Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Complaints division, which now covers 
the major land masses of three medium sized planets and is the only 
part of the Corporation to have shown a consistent profit in recent 
years. 
The motto stands ʹ or rather stood ʹ in three mile high illuminated 
letters near the Complaints Department spaceport on Eadrax. 
Unfortunately its weight was such that shortly after it was erected, 
the ground beneath the letters caved in and they dropped for nearly 
half their length through the offices of many talented young 
complaints executives ʹ now deceased. 
The protruding upper halves of the letters now appear, in the local 
language, to read "Go stick your head in a pig", and are no longer 
illuminated, except at times of special celebration. 
Arthur threw away a sixth cup of the liquid. 
"Listen, you machine," he said, "you claim you can synthesize any 
drink in existence, so why do you keep giving me the same 
undrinkable stuff?" 
"Nutrition and pleasurable sense data," burbled the machine. 
"Share and Enjoy." 
"It tastes filthy " 
"If you have enjoyed the experience of this drink," continued the 
machine, "why not share it with your friends?" 
"Because," said Arthur tartly, "I want to keep them. Will you try to 
comprehend what I'm telling you? That drink..." 
"That drink," said the machine sweetly, "was individually tailored to 
meet your personal requirements for nutrition and pleasure." 
"Ah," said Arthur, "so I'm a masochist on diet am I?" 
"Share and Enjoy." 
"Oh shut up." 
"Will that be all?" 
Arthur decided to give up. 
"Yes," he said. 
Then he decided he'd be dammed if he'd give up. 
"No," he said, "look, it's very, very simple... all I want... is a cup of 
tea. You are going to make one for me. Keep quiet and listen." 
And he sat. He told the Nutri`Matic about India, he told it about 
China, he told it about Ceylon. He told it about broad leaves drying in 
the sun. He told it about silver teapots. He told it about summer 
afternoons on the lawn. He told it about putting in the milk before the 
tea so it wouldn't get scalded. He even told it (briefly) about the 
history of the East India Company. 
"So that's it, is it?" said the Nutri`Matic when he had finished. 
"Yes," said Arthur, "that is what I want." 
"You want the taste of dried leaves boiled in water?" 
"Er, yes. With milk." 
"Squirted out of a cow?" 
"Well, in a manner of speaking I suppose..." 
"I'm going to need some help with this one," said the machine 
tersely. All the cheerful burbling had dropped out of its voice and it 
now meant business. 
"Well, anything I can do," said Arthur. 
"You've done quite enough," the Nutri`Matic informed him. 
It summoned up the ship's computer. 
"Hi there " said the ship's computer. 
The Nutri`Matic explained about tea to the ship's computer. The 
computer boggled, linked logic circuits with the Nutri`Matic and 
together they lapsed into a grim silence. 
Arthur watched and waited for a while, but nothing further 
happened. 
He thumped it, but still nothing happened. 
Eventually he gave up and wandered up to the bridge. 
In the empty wastes of space, the Heart of Gold hung still. Around 
it blazed the billion pinpricks of the Galaxy. Towards it crept the ugly 
yellow lump of the Vogon ship. 
Chapter 3
"Does anyone have a kettle?" Arthur asked as he walked on to the 
bridge, and instantly began to wonder why Trillian was yelling at the 
computer to talk to her, Ford was thumping it and Zaphod was kicking 
it, and also why there was a nasty yellow lump on the vision screen. 
He put down the empty cup he was carrying and walked over to 
them. 
"Hello?" he said. 
At that moment Zaphod flung himself over to the polished marble 
surfaces that contained the instruments that controlled the 
conventional photon drive. They materialized beneath his hands and 
he flipped over to manual control. He pushed, he pulled, he pressed 
and he swore. The photon drive gave a sickly judder and cut out again. 
"Something up?" said Arthur. 
"Hey, didja hear that?" muttered Zaphod as he leapt now for the 
manual controls of the Infinite Improbability Drive, "the monkey 
spoke " 
The Improbability Drive gave two small whines and then also cut 
out. 
"Pure history, man," said Zaphod, kicking the Improbability Drive, 
"a talking monkey " 
"If you're upset about something..." said Arthur. 
"Vogons " snapped Ford, "we're under attack " 
Arthur gibbered. 
"Well what are you doing? Let's get out of here " 
"Can't. Computer's jammed." 
"Jammed?" 
"It says all its circuits are occupied. There's no power anywhere in 
the ship." 
Ford moved away from the computer terminal, wiped a sleeve 
across his forehead and slumped back against the wall. 
"Nothing we can do," he said. He glared at nothing and bit his lip. 
When Arthur had been a boy at school, long before the Earth had 
been demolished, he had used to play football. He had not been at all 
good at it, and his particular speciality had been scoring own goals in 
important matches. Whenever this happened he used to experience a 
peculiar tingling round the back of his neck that would slowly creep 
up across his cheeks and heat his brow. The image of mud and grass 
and lots of little jeering boys flinging it at him suddenly came vividly 
to his mind at this moment. 
A peculiar tingling sensation at the back of his neck was creeping 
up across his cheeks and heating his brow. 
He started to speak, and stopped. 
He started to speak again and stopped again. 
Finally he managed to speak. 
"Er," he said. He cleared his throat. 
"Tell me," he continued, and said it so nervously that the others all 
turned to stare at him. He glanced at the approaching yellow blob on 
the vision screen. 
"Tell me," he said again, "did the computer say what was occupying 
it? I just ask out of interest..." 
Their eyes were riveted on him. 
"And, er... well that's it really, just asking." 
Zaphod put out a hand and held Arthur by the scruff of the neck. 
"What have you done to it, Monkeyman?" he breathed. 
"Well," said Arthur, "nothing in fact. It's just that I think a short 
while ago it was trying to work out how to..." 
"Yes?" 
"Make me some tea." 
"That's right guys," the computer sang out suddenly, "just coping 
with that problem right now, and wow, it's a biggy. Be with you in a 
while." It lapsed back into a silence that was only matched for sheer 
intensity by the silence of the three people staring at Arthur Dent. 
As if to relieve the tension, the Vogons chose that moment to start 
firing. 
The ship shook, the ship thundered. Outside, the inch thick force`
shield around it blistered, crackled and spat under the barrage of a 
dozen 30`Megahurt Definit`Kil Photrazon Cannon, and looked as if it 
wouldn't be around for long. Four minutes is how long Ford Prefect 
gave it."Three minutes and fifty seconds," he said a short while later. 
"Forty`five seconds," he added at the appropriate time. He flicked 
idly at some useless switches, then gave Arthur an unfriendly look. 
"Dying for a cup of tea, eh?" he said. "Three minutes and forty 
seconds." 
"Will you stop counting " snarled Zaphod. 
"Yes," said Ford Prefect, "in three minutes and thirty`five seconds." 
Aboard the Vogon ship, Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was puzzled. He had 
expected a chase, he had expected an exciting grapple with tractor 
beams, he had expected to have to use the specially installed Sub`
Cyclic Normality Assert`i`Tron to counter the Heart of Gold's Infinite 
Improbability Drive, but the Sub`Cyclic Normality Assert`i`Tron lay idle 
as the Heart of Gold just sat there and took it. 
A dozen 30`Megahurt Definit`Kil Photrazon Cannon continued to 
blaze away at the Heart of Gold, and still it just sat there and took it. 
He tested every sensor at his disposal to see if there was any subtle 
trickery afoot, but no subtle trickery was to be found. 
He didn't know about the tea of course. 
Nor did he know exactly how the occupants of the Heart of Gold 
were spending the last three minutes and thirty seconds of life they 
had left to spend. 
Quite how Zaphod Beeblebrox arrived at the idea of holding a 
seance at this point is something he was never quite clear on. 
Obviously the subject of death was in the air, but more as 
something to be avoided than harped upon. 
Possibly the horror that Zaphod experienced at the prospect of 
being reunited with his deceased relatives led on to the thought that 
they might just feel the same way about him and, what's more, be 
able to do something about helping to postpone this reunion. 
Or again it might just have been one of the strange promptings that 
occasionally surfaced from that dark area of his mind that he had 
inexplicably locked off prior to becoming President of the Galaxy. 
"You want to talk to your great grandfather?" boggled Ford. 
"Yeah." 
"Does it have to be now?" 
The ship continued to shake and thunder. The temperature was 
rising. The light was getting dimmer ʹ all the energy the computer 
didn't require for thinking about tea was being pumped into the 
rapidly fading force`field. 
"Yeah " insisted Zaphod. "Listen Ford, I think he may be able to 
help us." 
"Are you sure you mean think? Pick your words with care." 
"Suggest something else we can do." 
"Er, well..." 
"OK, round the central console. Now. Come on  Trillian, 
Monkeyman, move." 
They clustered round the central console in confusion, sat down 
and, feeling exceptionally foolish, held hands. With his third hand 
Zaphod turned off the lights. 
Darkness gripped the ship. 
Outside, the thunderous roar of the Definit`Kil cannon continued to 
rip at the force`field. 
"Concentrate," hissed Zaphod, "on his name." 
"What is it?" asked Arthur. 
"Zaphod Beeblebrox the Fourth." 
"What?" 
"Zaphod Beeblebrox the Fourth. Concentrate " 
"The Fourth?" 
"Yeah. Listen, I'm Zaphod Beeblebrox, my father was Zaphod 
Beeblebrox the Second, my grandfather Zaphod Beeblebrox the 
Third..." 
"What?" 
"There was an accident with a contraceptive and a time machine. 
Now concentrate " 
"Three minutes," said Ford Prefect. 
"Why," said Arthur Dent, "are we doing this?" 
"Shut up," suggested Zaphod Beeblebrox. 
Trillian said nothing. What, she thought, was there to say? 
The only light on the bridge came from two dim red triangles in a 
far corner where Marvin the Paranoid Android sat slumped, ignoring 
all and ignored by all, in a private and rather unpleasant world of his 
own. 
Round the central console four figures hunched in tight 
concentration trying to blot from their minds the terrifying 
shuddering of the ship and the fearful roar that echoed through it. 
They concentrated. 
Still they concentrated. 
And still they concentrated. 
The seconds ticked by. 
On Zaphod's brow stood beads of sweat, first of concentration, 
then of frustration and finally of embarrassment. 
At last he let out a cry of anger, snatched back his hands from 
Trillian and Ford and stabbed at the light switch. 
"Ah, I was beginning to think you'd never turn the lights on," said a 
voice. "No, not too bright please, my eyes aren't what they once 
were." 
Four figures jolted upright in their seats. Slowly they turned their 
heads to look, though their scalps showed a distinct propensity to try
and stay in the same place. 
"Now. Who disturbs me at this time?" said the small, bent, gaunt 
figure standing by the sprays of fern at the far end of the bridge. His 
two small wispy`haired heads looked so ancient that it seemed they 
might hold dim memories of the birth of the galaxies themselves. One 
lolled in sleep, but the other squinted sharply at them. If his eyes 
weren't what they once were, they must once have been diamond 
cutters. 
Zaphod stuttered nervously for a moment. He gave the intricate 
little double nod which is the traditional Betelgeusian gesture of 
familial respect. 
"Oh... er, hi Great Granddad..." he breathed. 
The little old figure moved closer towards them. He peered 
through the dim light. He thrust out a bony finger at his great 
grandson. 
"Ah," he snapped. "Zaphod Beeblebrox. The last of our great line. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox the Nothingth." 
"The First." 
"The Nothingth," spat the figure. Zaphod hated his voice. It always 
seemed to him to screech like fingernails across the blackboard of 
what he liked to think of as his soul. 
He shifted awkwardly in his seat. 
"Er, yeah," he muttered, "Er, look, I'm really sorry about the 
flowers, I meant to send them along, but you know, the shop was 
fresh out of wreaths and..." 
"You forget " snapped Zaphod Beeblebrox the Fourth. 
"Well..." 
"Too busy. Never think of other people. The living are all the 
same." 
"Two minutes, Zaphod," whispered Ford in an awed whisper. 
Zaphod fidgeted nervously. 
"Yeah, but I did mean to send them," he said. "And I'll write to my 
great grandmother as well, just as soon as we get out of this..." 
"Your great grandmother," mused the gaunt little figure to himself. 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "Er, how is she? Tell you what, I'll go and see 
her. But first we've just got to..." 
"Your late great grandmother and I are very well," rasped Zaphod 
Beeblebrox the Fourth. 
"Ah. Oh." 
"But very disappointed in you, young Zaphod..." 
"Yeah well..." Zaphod felt strangely powerless to take charge of this 
conversation, and Ford's heavy breathing at his side told him that the 
seconds were ticking away fast. The noise and the shaking had 
reached terrifying proportions. He saw Trillian and Arthur's faces 
white and unblinking in the gloom. 
"Er, Great Grandfather..." 
"We've been following your progress with considerable 
despondency..." 
"Yeah, look, just at the moment you see..." 
"Not to say contempt " 
"Could you sort of listen for a moment..." 
"I mean what exactly are you doing with your life?" 
"I'm being attacked by a Vogon fleet " cried Zaphod. It was an 
exaggeration, but it was his only opportunity so far of getting the 
basic point of the exercise across. 
"Doesn't surprise me in the least," said the little old figure with a 
shrug. 
"Only it's happening right now you see," insisted Zaphod feverishly. 
The spectral ancestor nodded, picked up the cup Arthur Dent had 
brought in and looked at it with interest. 
"Er... Great Granddad..." 
"Did you know," interrupting the ghostly figure, fixing Zaphod with 
a stern look, "that Betelgeuse Five has developed a very slight 
eccentricy in its orbit?" 
Zaphod didn't and found the information hard to concentrate on 
what with all the noise and the imminence of death and so on. 
"Er, no... look," he said. 
"Me spinning in my grave " barked the ancestor. He slammed the 
cup down and pointed a quivering, stick`like see`through finger at 
Zaphod. 
"Your fault " he screeched. 
"One minute thirty," muttered Ford, his head in his hands. 
"Yeah, look Great Granddad, can you actually help because..." 
"Help?" exclaimed the old man as if he'd been asked for a stoat. 
"Yeah, help, and like, now, because otherwise..." 
"Help " repeated the old man as if he'd been asked for a lightly 
grilled stoat in a bun with French fries. He stood amazed. 
"You go swanning your way round the Galaxy with your..." the 
ancestor waved a contemptuous hand, "with your disreputable 
friends, too busy to put flowers on my grave, plastic ones would have 
done, would have been quite appropriate from you, but no. Too busy. 
Too modern. Too sceptical ʹ till you suddenly find yourself in a bit of a 
fix and come over suddenly all astrally`minded " 
He shook his head ʹ carefully, so as not to disturb the slumber of 
the other one, which was already becoming restive. 
"Well, I don't know, young Zaphod," he continued, "I think I'll have 
to think about this one." 
"One minute ten," said Ford hollowly. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox the Fourth peered at him curiously. 
"Why does that man keep talking in numbers?" he said. 
"Those numbers," said Zaphod tersely, "are the time we've got left 
to live." 
"Oh," said his great grandfather. He grunted to himself. "Doesn't 
apply to me, of course," he said and moved off to a dimmer recess of 
the bridge in search of something else to poke around at. 
Zaphod felt he was teetering on the edge of madness and 
wondered if he shouldn't just jump over and have done with it. 
"Great Grandfather," he said, "It applies to us  We are still alive, 
and we are about to lose our lives." 
"Good job too." 
"What?" 
"What use is your life to anyone? When I think of what you've 
made of it the phrase 'pig's ear' comes irresistibly to my mind." 
"But I was President of the Galaxy, man " 
"Huh," muttered his ancestor, "And what kind of a job is that for a 
Beeblebrox?" 
"Hey, what? Only President you know  Of the whole Galaxy " 
"Conceited little megapuppy." 
Zaphod blinked in bewilderment. 
"Hey, er, what are you at, man? I mean Great Grandfather." 
The hunched up little figure stalked up to his great grandson and 
tapped him sternly on the knee. This had the effect of reminding 
Zaphod that he was talking to a ghost because he didn't feel a thing. 
"You know and I know what being President means, young Zaphod. 
You know because you've been it, and I know because I'm dead and it 
gives one such a wonderfully uncluttered perspective. We have a 
saying up here. 'Life is wasted on the living.'" 
"Yeah," said Zaphod bitterly, "very good. Very deep. Right now I 
need aphorisms like I need holes in my heads." 
"Fifty seconds," grunted Ford Prefect. 
"Where was I?" said Zaphod Beeblebrox the Fourth. 
"Pontificating," said Zaphod Beeblebrox. 
"Oh yes." 
"Can this guy," muttered Ford quietly to Zaphod, "actually in fact 
help us?" 
"Nobody else can," whispered Zaphod. 
Ford nodded despondently. 
"Zaphod " the ghost was saying, "you became President of the 
Galaxy for a reason. Have you forgotten?" 
"Could we go into this later?" 
"Have you forgotten " insisted the ghost.
"Yeah  Of course I forgot  I had to forget. They screen your brain 
when you get the job you know. If they'd found my head full of tricksy 
ideas I'd have been right out on the streets again with nothing but a 
fat pension, secretarial staff, a fleet of ships and a couple of slit 
throats." 
"Ah," nodded the ghost in satisfaction, "then you do remember " 
He paused for a moment. 
"Good," he said and the noise stopped. 
"Forty`eight seconds," said Ford. He looked again at his watch and 
tapped it. He looked up.
"Hey, the noise has stopped," he said. 
A mischievous twinkle gleamed in the ghost's hard little eyes. 
"I've slowed down time for a moment," he said, "just for a moment 
you understand. I would hate you to miss all I have to say." 
"No, you listen to me, you see`through old bat," said Zaphod 
leaping out of his chair, "A ʹ thanks for stopping time and all that, 
great, terrific, wonderful, but B ʹ no thanks for the homily, right? I 
don't know what this great think I'm meant to be doing is, and it looks 
to me as if I was supposed not to know. And I resent that, right? 
"The old me knew. The old me cared. Fine, so far so hoopy. Except 
that the old me cared so much that he actually got inside his own 
brain ʹ my own brain ʹ and locked off the bits that knew and cared, 
because if I knew and cared I wouldn't be able to do it. I wouldn't be 
able to go and be President, and I wouldn't be able to steal this ship, 
which must be the important thing. 
"But this former self of mine killed himself off, didn't he, by 
changing my brain? OK, that was his choice. This new me has its own 
choices to make, and by a strange coincidence those choices involve 
not knowing and not caring about this big number, whatever it is. 
That's what he wanted, that's what he got. 
"Except this old self of mine tried to leave himself in control, 
leaving orders for me in the bit of my brain he locked off. Well, I don't 
want to know, and I don't want to hear them. That's my choice. I'm 
not going to be anybody's puppet, particularly not my own." 
Zaphod banged the console in fury, oblivious to the dumbfolded 
looks he was attracting. 
"The old me is dead " he raved, "Killed himself  The dead shouldn't 
hang about trying to interfere with the living " 
"And yet you summon me up to help you out of a scrape," said the 
ghost. 
"Ah," said Zaphod, sitting down again, "well that's different isn't 
it?" 
He grinned at Trillian, weakly. 
"Zaphod," rasped the apparition, "I think the only reason I waste 
my breath on you is that being dead I don't have any other use for it." 
"OK," said Zaphod, "why don't you tell me what the big secret is. 
Try me." 
"Zaphod, you knew when you were President of the Galaxy, as did 
Yooden Vranx before you, that the President is nothing. A cipher. 
Somewhere in the shadows behind is another man, being, something, 
with ultimate power. That man, or being, or something, you must find
ʹ the man who controls this Galaxy, and ʹ we suspect ʹ others. 
Possibly the entire Universe." 
"Why?" 
"Why?" exclaimed an astonished ghost, "Why? Look around you
lad, does it look to you as if it's in very good hands?" 
"It's alright." 
The old ghost glowered at him. 
"I will not argue with you. You will simply take this ship, this 
Improbability Drive ship to where it is needed. You will do it. Don't 
think you can escape your purpose. The Improbability Field controls 
you, you are in its grip. What's this?" 
He was standing tapping at one of the terminals of Eddie the 
Shipboard Computer. Zaphod told him. 
"What's it doing?" 
"It is trying," said Zaphod with wonderful restraint, "to make tea." 
"Good," said his great grandfather, "I approve of that. Now Zaphod, 
"he said, turning and wagging a finger at him, "I don't know if you are 
really capable of succeeding in your job. I think you will not be able to 
avoid it. However, I am too long dead and too tired to care as much as 
I did. The principal reason I am helping you now is that I couldn't bear 
the thought of you and your modern friends slouching about up here. 
Understood?" 
"Yeah, thanks a bundle." 
"Oh, and Zaphod?" 
"Er, yeah?" 
"If you ever find you need help again, you know, if you're in trouble, 
need a hand out of a tight corner..." 
"Yeah?" 
"Please don't hesitate to get lost." 
Within the space of one second, a bolt of light flashed from the 
wizened old ghost's hands to the computer, the ghost vanished, the 
bridge filled with billowing smoke and the Heart of Gold leapt an 
unknown distance through the dimensions of time and space. 
Chapter 4
Ten light years away, Gag Halfrunt jacked up his smile by several 
notches. As he watched the picture on his vision screen, relayed 
across the sub`ether from the bridge of the Vogon ship, he saw the 
final shreds of the Heart of Gold's force`shield ripped away, and the 
ship itself vanish in a puff of smoke. 
Good, he thought. 
The end of the last stray survivors of the demolition he had 
ordered on the planet Earth, he thought. 
The final end of this dangerous (to the psychiatric profession) and 
subversive (also to the psychiatric profession) experiment to find the 
Question to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and 
Everything, he thought. 
There would be some celebration with his fellows tonight, and in 
the morning they would meet again their unhappy, bewildered and 
highly profitable patients, secure in the knowledge that the Meaning 
of Life would not now be, once and for all, well and truly sorted out, 
he thought. 
"Family's always embarrassing isn't it?" said Ford to Zaphod as the 
smoke began to clear. 
He paused, then looked about. 
"Where's Zaphod?" he said. 
Arthur and Trillian looked about blankly. They were pale and 
shaken and didn't know where Zaphod was. 
"Marvin?" said Ford, "Where's Zaphod?" 
A moment later he said: 
"Where's Marvin?" 
The robot's corner was empty. 
The ship was utterly silent. It lay in thick black space. Occasionally it 
rocked and swayed. Every instrument was dead, every vision screen 
was dead. They consulted the computer. It said: 
"I regret that I have been temporarily closed to all communication. 
Meanwhile, here is some light music." 
They turned off the light music. 
They searched every corner of the ship in increasing bewilderment 
and alarm. Everywhere was dead and silent. Nowhere was there any 
trace of Zaphod or of Marvin. 
One of the last areas they checked was the small bay in which the 
Nutri`Matic machine was located. 
On the delivery plate of the Nutri`Matic Drink Synthesizer was a 
small tray, on which sat three bone china cups and saucers, a bone 
china jug of milk, a silver teapot full of the best tea Arthur had ever 
tasted, and a small printed note saying "Wait". 
Chapter 5
Ursa Minor Beta is, some say, one of the most appalling places in 
the known Universe. 
Although it is excruciatingly rich, horrifyingly sunny and more full of 
wonderfully exciting people than a pomegranate is of pips, it can 
hardly be insignificant that when a recent edition of Playbeing 
magazine headlined an article with the words "When you are tired of 
Ursa Minor Beta you are tired of life", the suicide rate quadrupled 
overnight. 
Not that there are any nights on Ursa Minor Beta. 
It is a West Zone planet which by an inexplicable and somewhat 
suspicious freak of topography consists almost entirely of sub`tropical 
coastline. By an equally suspicious freak of temporal relastatics, it is 
nearly always Saturday afternoon just before the beach bars close. 
No adequate explanation for this has been forthcoming from the 
dominant lifeforms on Ursa Minor Beta, who spend most of their time 
attempting to achieve spiritual enlightenment by running round 
swimming pools, and inviting Investigation Officials form the Galactic 
Geo`Temporal Control Board to "have a nice diurnal anomaly". 
There is only one city on Ursa Minor Beta, and that is only called a 
city because the swimming pools are slightly thicker on the ground 
there than elsewhere. 
If you approach Light City by air ʹ and there is no other way of 
approaching it, no roads, no port facilities ʹ if you don't fly they don't 
want to see you in Light City ʹ you will see why it has this name. Here 
the sun shines brightest of all, glittering on the swimming pools, 
shimmering on the white, palm`lined boulevards, glistening on the 
healthy bronzed specks moving up and down them, gleaming off the 
villas, the hazy airpads, the beach bars and so on. 
Most particularly it shines on a building, a tall beautiful building 
consisting of two thirty`storey white towers connected by a bridge 
half`way up their length. 
The building is the home of a book, and was built here on the 
proceeds of an extraordinary copyright law suit fought between the 
book's editors and a breakfast cereal company. 
The book is a guide book, a travel book. 
It is one of the most remarkable, certainly the most successful, 
books ever to come out of the great publishing corporations of Ursa 
Minor ʹ more popular than Life Begins at Five Hundred and Fifty, 
better selling than The Big Bang Theory ʹ A Personal View by 
Eccentrica Gallumbits (the triple breasted whore of Eroticon Six) and 
more controversial than Oolon Colluphid's latest blockbusting title 
Everything You Never Wanted To Know About Sex But Have Been 
Forced To Find Out. 
(And in many of the more relaxed civilizations on the Outer Eastern 
Rim of the Galaxy, it has long surplanted the great Encyclopaedia 
Galactica as the standard repository of all knowledge and wisdom, for 
though it has many omissions and contains much that is apocryphal, 
or at least wildly inaccurate, it scores over the older and more 
pedestrian work in two important respects. First, it is slightly cheaper, 
and secondly it has the words DON'T PANIC printed in large friendly 
letters on its cover.) 
It is of course that invaluable companion for all those who want to 
see the marvels of the known Universe for less than thirty Altairan 
Dollars a day ʹ The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. 
If you stood with your back to the main entrance lobby of the 
Guide offices (assuming you had landed by now and freshened up 
with a quick dip and shower) and then walked east, you would pass 
along the leafy shade of Life Boulevard, be amazed by the pale golden 
colour of the beaches stretching away to your left, astounded by the 
mind`surfers floating carelessly along two feet above the waves as if it 
was nothing special, surprised and eventually slightly irritated by the 
giant palm trees that hum toneless nothings throughout the daylight 
hours, in other words continuously. 
If you then walked to the end of Life Boulevard you would enter 
the Lalamatine district of shops, bolonut trees and pavement cafes 
where the UM`Betans come to relax after a hard afternoon's 
relaxation on the beach. The Lalamatine district is one of those very 
few areas which doesn't enjoy a perpetual Saturday afternoon ʹ it 
enjoys instead the cool of a perpetual early Saturday evening. Behind 
it lie the night clubs. 
If, on this particular day, afternoon, stretch of eveningtime ʹ call it 
what you will ʹ you had approached the second pavement cafe on the 
right you would have seen the usual crowd of UM`Betans chatting, 
drinking, looking very relaxed, and casually glancing at each other's 
watches to see how expensive they were. 
You would also have seen a couple of rather dishevelled looking 
hitch`hikers from Algol who had recently arrived on an Arcturan 
Megafreighter aboard which they had been roughing it for a few days. 
They were angry and bewildered to discover that here, within sight of 
the Hitchhiker's Guide building itself, a simple glass of fruit juice cost 
the equivalent of over sixty Altairan dollars. 
"Sell out," one of them said, bitterly. 
If at that moment you had then looked at the next table but one 
you would have seen Zaphod Beeblebrox sitting and looking very 
startled and confused. 
The reason for his confusion was that five seconds earlier he had 
been sitting on the bridge of the starship Heart of Gold. 
"Absolute sell out," said the voice again. 
Zaphod looked nervously out of the corners of his eyes at the two 
dishevelled hitch`hikers at the next table. Where the hell was he? 
How had he got there? Where was his ship? His hand felt the arm of 
the chair on which he was sitting, and then the table in front of him. 
They seemed solid enough. He sat very still. 
"How can they sit and write a guide for hitch`hikers in a place like 
this?" continued the voice. "I mean look at it. Look at it " 
Zaphod was looking at it. Nice place, he thought. But where? And 
why? 
He fished in his pocket for his two pairs of sunglasses. In the same 
pocket he felt a hard smooth, unidentified lump of very heavy metal. 
He pulled it out and looked at it. He blinked at it in surprise. Where 
had he got that? He returned it to his pocket and put on the 
sunglasses, annoyed to discover that the metal object had scratched 
one of the lenses. Nevertheless, he felt much more comfortable with 
them on. They were a double pair of Joo Janta 200 Super`Chromatic 
Peril Sensitive Sunglasses, which had been specially designed to help 
people develop a relaxed attitude to danger. At the first hint of 
trouble they turn totally black and thus prevent you from seeing 
anything that might alarm you. 
Apart from the scratch the lenses were clear. He relaxed, but only a 
little bit. 
The angry hitch`hiker continued to glare at his monstrously 
expensive fruit juice. 
"Worst thing that ever happened to the Guide, moving to Ursa 
Minor Beta," he grumbled, "they've all gone soft. You know, I've even 
heard that they've created a whole electronically synthesized 
Universe in one of their offices so they can go and research stories 
during the day and still go to parties in the evening. Not that day and 
evening mean much in this place." 
Ursa Minor Beta, thought Zaphod. At least he knew where he was 
now. He assumed that this must be his great grandfather's doing, but 
why? 
Much to his annoyance, a thought popped into his mind. It was 
very clear and very distinct, and he had now come to recognize these 
thoughts for what they were. His instinct was to resist them. They 
were the pre`ordained promptings from the dark and locked off parts 
of his mind. 
He sat still and ignored the thought furiously. It nagged at him. He 
ignored it. It nagged at him. He ignored it. It nagged at him. He gave in 
to it. 
What the hell, he thought, go with the flow. He was too tired, 
confused and hungry to resist. He didn't even know what the thought 
meant. 
Chapter 6
"Hello? Yes? Megadodo Publications, home of the Hitchhiker's 
Guide to the Galaxy, the most totally remarkable book in the whole of 
the known Universe, can I help you?" said the large pink`winged 
insect into one of the seventy phones lined up along the vast chrome 
expanse of the reception desk in the foyer of the Hitchhiker's Guide to 
the Galaxy offices. It fluttered its wings and rolled its eyes. It glared at 
all the grubby people cluttering up the foyer, soiling the carpets and 
leaving dirty handmarks on the upholstery. It adored working for the 
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, it just wished there was some way of 
keeping all the hitch`hikers away. Weren't they meant to be hanging 
round dirty spaceports or something? It was certain that it had read 
something somewhere in the book about the importance of hanging 
round dirty spaceports. Unfortunately most of them seemed to come 
and hang around in this nice clean shiny foyer after hanging around in 
extremely dirty spaceports. And all they ever did was complain. It 
shivered its wings. 
"What?" it said into the phone. "Yes, I passed on your message to 
Mr. Zarniwoop, but I'm afraid he's too cool to see you right now. He's 
on an intergalactic cruise." 
It waved a petulant tentacle at one of the grubby people who was 
angrily trying to engage its attention. The petulant tentacle directed 
the angry person to look at the notice on the wall to its left and not to 
interrupt an important phone call. 
"Yes," said the insect, "he is in his office, but he's on an 
intergalactic cruise. Thank you so much for calling." It slammed down 
the phone. 
"Read the notice," it said to the angry man who was trying to 
complain about one of the more ludicrous and dangerous pieces of 
misinformation contained in the book. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is an indispensable companion 
to all those who are keen to make sense of life in an infinitely complex 
and confusing Universe, for though it cannot hope to be useful or 
informative on all matters, it does at least make the reassuring claim, 
that where it is inaccurate it is at least definitely inaccurate. In cases 
of major discrepancy it's always reality that's got it wrong. 
This was the gist of the notice. It said "The Guide is definitive. 
Reality is frequently inaccurate." 
This has led to some interesting consequences. For instance, when 
the Editors of the Guide were sued by the families of those who had 
died as a result of taking the entry on the planet Traal literally (it said 
"Ravenous Bugblatter beasts often make a very good meal for visiting 
tourists" instead of "Ravenous Bugblatter beasts often make a very 
good meal of visiting tourists") they claimed that the first version of 
the sentence was the more aesthetically pleasing, summoned a 
qualified poet to testify under oath that beauty was truth, truth 
beauty and hoped thereby to prove that the guilty party was Life itself 
for failing to be either beautiful or true. The judges concurred, and in 
a moving speech held that Life itself was in contempt of court, and 
duly confiscated it from all those there present before going off to 
enjoy a pleasant evening's ultragolf. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox entered the foyer. He strode up to the insect 
receptionist. 
"OK," he said, "Where's Zarniwoop? Get me Zarniwoop." 
"Excuse me, sir?" said the insect icily. It did not care to be 
addressed in this manner. 
"Zarniwoop. Get him, right? Get him now." 
"Well, sir," snapped the fragile little creature, "if you could be a 
little cool about it..." 
Look," said Zaphod, "I'm up to here with cool, OK? I'm so amazingly 
cool you could keep a side of meat inside me for a month. I am so hip 
I have difficulty seeing over my pelvis. Now will you move before you 
blow it?" 
"Well, if you'd let me explain, sir," said the insect tapping the most 
petulant of all the tentacles at its disposal, "I'm afraid that isn't 
possible right now as Mr. Zarniwoop is on an intergalactic cruise." 
Hell, thought Zaphod. 
"When he's going to be back?" he said. 
"Back sir? He's in his office." 
Zaphod paused while he tried to sort this particular thought out in 
his mind. He didn't succeed. 
"This cat's on an intergalactic cruise... in his office?" He leaned 
forward and gripped the tapping tentacle. 
"Listen, three eyes," he said, "don't you try to outweird me. I get 
stranger things than you free with my breakfast cereal." 
"Well, just who do you think you are, honey?" flounced the insect 
quivering its wings in rage, "Zaphod Beeblebrox or something?" 
"Count the heads," said Zaphod in a low rasp. 
The insect blinked at him. It blinked at him again. 
"You are Zaphod Beeblebrox?" it squeaked. 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "but don't shout it out or they'll all want one." 
"The Zaphod Beeblebrox?" 
"No, just a Zaphod Beeblebrox, didn't you hear I come in six 
packs?" 
The insect rattled its tentacles together in agitation. 
"But sir," it squealed, "I just heard on the sub`ether radio report. It 
said that you were dead..." 
"Yeah, that's right," said Zaphod, "I just haven't stopped moving yet. 
Now. Where do I find Zarniwoop?" 
"Well, sir, his office is on the fifteenth floor, but..." 
"But he's on an intergalactic cruise, yeah, yeah, how do I get to 
him." 
"The newly installed Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Vertical People 
Transporters are in the far corner sir. But sir..." 
Zaphod was turning to go. He turned back. 
"Yeah?" he said. 
"Can I ask you why you want to see Mr. Zarniwoop?" 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, who was unclear on this point himself, "I told 
myself I had to." 
"Come again sir?" 
Zaphod leaned forward, conspirationally. 
"I just materialized out of thin air in one of your cafes," he said, "as 
a result of an argument with the ghost of my great grandfather. No 
sooner had I got there that my former self, the one that operated on 
my brain, popped into my head and said 'Go see Zarniwoop'. I have 
never heard of the cat. That is all I know. That and the fact that I've 
got to find the man who rules the Universe." 
He winked. 
"Mr. Beeblebrox, sir," said the insect in awed wonder, "you're so 
weird you should be in movies." 
"Yeah," said Zaphod patting the thing on a glittering pink wing, 
"and you, baby, should be in real life." 
The insect paused for a moment to recover from its agitation and 
then reached out a tentacle to answer a ringing phone. 
A metal hand restrained it. 
"Excuse me," said the owner of the metal hand in a voice that 
would have made an insect of a more sentimental disposition collapse 
in tears. 
This was not such an insect, and it couldn't stand robots. 
"Yes, sir," it snapped, "can I help you?" 
"I doubt it," said Marvin. 
"Well in that case, if you'll just excuse me..." Six of the phones were 
now ringing. A million things awaited the insect's attention. 
"No one can help me," intoned Marvin. 
"Yes, sir, well..." 
"Not that anyone tried of course." The restraining metal hand fell 
limply by Marvin's side. His head hung forward very slightly. 
"Is that so," said the insect tartly. 
"Hardly worth anyone's while to help a menial robot is it?" 
"I'm sorry, sir, if..." 
"I mean where's the percentage in being kind or helpful to a robot 
if it doesn't have any gratitude circuits?" 
"And you don't have any?" said the insect, who didn't seem to be 
able to drag itself out of this conversation. 
"I've never had occasion to find out," Marvin informed it. 
"Listen, you miserable heap of maladjusted metal..." 
"Aren't you going to ask me what I want?" 
The insect paused. Its long thin tongue darted out and licked its 
eyes and darted back again. 
"Is it worth it?" it asked. 
"Is anything?" said Marvin immediately. 
"What... do... you... want?" 
"I'm looking for someone." 
"Who?" hissed the insect. 
"Zaphod Beeblebrox," said Marvin, "he's over there." 
The insect shook with rage. It could hardly speak. 
"Then why did you ask me?" it screamed. 
"I just wanted something to talk to," said Marvin. 
"What " 
"Pathetic isn't it?" 
With a grinding of gears Marvin turned and trundled off. He caught 
up with Zaphod approaching the elevators. Zaphod span round in 
astonishment. 
"Hey... Marvin " he said, "Marvin  How did you get here?" 
Marvin was forced to say something which came very hard to him. 
"I don't know," he said. 
"But..." 
"One moment I was sitting in your ship feeling very depressed, and 
the next moment I was standing here feeling utterly miserable. An 
Improbability Field I expect." 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "I expect my great grandfather sent you along 
to keep me company." 
"Thanks a bundle grandad," he added to himself under his breath. 
"So, how are you?" he said aloud. 
"Oh, fine," said Marvin, "if you happen to like being me which 
personally I don't." 
"Yeah, yeah," said Zaphod as the elevator doors opened. 
"Hello," said the elevator sweetly, "I am to be your elevator for this 
trip to the floor of your choice. I have been designed by the Sirius 
Cybernetics Corporation to take you, the visitor to the Hitchhiker's 
Guide to the Galaxy, into these their offices. If you enjoy your ride, 
which will be swift and pleasurable, then you may care to experience 
some of the other elevators which have recently been installed in the 
offices of the Galactic tax department, Boobiloo Baby Foods and the 
Sirian State Mental Hospital, where many ex`Sirius Cybernetics 
Corporation executives will be delighted to welcome your visits, 
sympathy, and happy tales of the outside world." 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, stepping into it, "what else do you do besides 
talk?" 
"I go up," said the elevator, "or down." 
"Good," said Zaphod, "We're going up." 
"Or down," the elevator reminded him. 
"Yeah, OK, up please." 
There was a moment of silence. 
"Down's very nice," suggested the elevator hopefully. 
"Oh yeah?" 
"Super." 
"Good," said Zaphod, "Now will you take us up?" 
"May I ask you," inquired the elevator in its sweetest, most 
reasonable voice, "if you've considered all the possibilities that down 
might offer you?" 
Zaphod knocked one of his heads against the inside wall. He didn't 
need this, he thought to himself, this of all things he had no need of. 
He hadn't asked to be here. If he was asked at this moment where he 
would like to be he would probably have said he would like to be lying 
on the beach with at least fifty beautiful women and a small team of 
experts working out new ways they could be nice to him, which was 
his usual reply. To this he would probably have added something 
passionate on the subject of food. 
One thing he didn't want to be doing was chasing after the man 
who ruled the Universe, who was only doing a job which he might as 
well keep at, because if it wasn't him it would only be someone else. 
Most of all he didn't want to be standing in an office block arguing 
with an elevator. 
"Like what other possibilities?" he asked wearily. 
"Well," the voice trickled on like honey on biscuits, "there's the 
basement, the microfiles, the heating system... er..." 
It paused. 
"Nothing particularly exciting," it admitted, "but they are 
alternatives." 
"Holy Zarquon," muttered Zaphod, "did I ask for an existentialist 
elevator?" he beat his fists against the wall. 
"What's the matter with the thing?" he spat. 
"It doesn't want to go up," said Marvin simply, "I think it's afraid." 
"Afraid?" cried Zaphod, "Of what? Heights? An elevator that's 
afraid of heights?" 
"No," said the elevator miserably, "of the future..." 
"The future?" exclaimed Zaphod, "What does the wretched thing 
want, a pension scheme?" 
At that moment a commotion broke out in the reception hall 
behind them. From the walls around them came the sound of 
suddenly active machinery. 
"We can all see into the future," whispered the elevator in what 
sounded like terror, "it's part of our programming." 
Zaphod looked out of the elevator ʹ an agitated crowd had 
gathered round the elevator area, pointing and shouting. 
Every elevator in the building was coming down, very fast. 
He ducked back in. 
"Marvin," he said, "just get this elevator go up will you? We've got 
to get to Zarniwoop." 
"Why?" asked Marvin dolefully. 
"I don't know," said Zaphod, "but when I find him, he'd better have 
a very good reason for me wanting to see him." 
Modern elevators are strange and complex entities. The ancient 
electric winch and "maximum`capacity`eight`persons" jobs bear as 
much relation to a Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Happy Vertical 
People Transporter as a packet of mixed nuts does to the entire west 
wing of the Sirian State Mental Hospital. 
This is because they operate on the curios principle of "defocused 
temporal perception". In other words they have the capacity to see 
dimly into the immediate future, which enables the elevator to be on 
the right floor to pick you up even before you knew you wanted it, 
thus eliminating all the tedious chatting, relaxing, and making friends 
that people were previously forced to do whist waiting for elevators. 
Not unnaturally, many elevators imbued with intelligence and 
precognition became terribly frustrated with the mindless business of 
going up and down, up and down, experimented briefly with the 
notion of going sideways, as a sort of existential protest, demanded 
participation in the decision`making process and finally took to 
squatting in basements sulking. 
An impoverished hitch`hiker visiting any planets in the Sirius star 
system these days can pick up easy money working as a counsellor for 
neurotic elevators. 
At the fifteenth floor the elevator doors opened quickly. 
"Fifteenth," said the elevator, "and remember, I'm only doing this
because I like your robot." 
Zaphod and Marvin bundled out of the elevator which instantly 
snapped its doors shut and dropped as fast as its mechanism would 
take it. 
Zaphod looked around warily. The corridor was deserted and silent 
and gave no clue as to where Zarniwoop might be found. All the doors 
that led off the corridor were closed and unmarked. 
They were standing close to the bridge which led across from one 
tower of the building to the other. Through a large window the 
brilliant sun of Ursa Minor Beta threw blocks of light in which danced 
small specks of dust. A shadow flitted past momentarily. 
"Left in the lurch by a lift," muttered Zaphod, who was feeling at 
his least jaunty. 
They both stood and looked in both directions. 
"You know something?" said Zaphod to Marvin. 
"More that you can possibly imagine." 
"I'm dead certain this building shouldn't be shaking," Zaphod said. 
It was just a light tremor through the soles of his feet ʹ and 
another one. In the sunbeams the flecks of dust danced more 
vigorously. Another shadow flitted past. 
Zaphod looked at the floor. 
"Either," he said, not very confidently, "they've got some vibro 
system for toning up your muscles while you work, or..." 
He walked across to the window and suddenly stumbled because 
at that moment his Joo Janta 200 Super`Chromatic Peril Sensitive 
sunglasses had turned utterly black. A large shadow flitted past the 
window with a sharp buzz. 
Zaphod ripped off his sunglasses, and as he did so the building 
shook with a thunderous roar. He leapt to the window. 
"Or," he said, "this building's being bombed " 
Another roar cracked through the building. 
"Who in the Galaxy would want to bomb a publishing company?" 
asked Zaphod, but never heard Marvin's reply because at that 
moment the building shook with another bomb attack. He tried to 
stagger back to the elevator ʹ a pointless manoeuvre he realized, but 
the only one he could think of. 
Suddenly, at the end of the corridor leading at right angles from 
this one, he caught sight of a figure as it lunged into view, a man. The 
man saw him. 
"Beeblebrox, over here " he shouted. 
Zaphod eyed him with distrust as another bomb blast rocked the 
building. 
"No," called Zaphod, "Beeblebrox over here  Who are you?" 
"A friend " shouted back the man. He ran towards Zaphod. 
"Oh yeah?" said Zaphod, "Anyone's friend in particular, or just 
generally well disposed of people?" 
The man raced along the corridor, the floor bucking beneath his 
feet like an excited blanket. He was short, stocky and weatherbeaten 
and his clothes looked as if they'd been twice round the Galaxy and 
back with him in them. 
"Do you know," Zaphod shouted in his ear when he arrived, "your 
building's being bombed?" 
The man indicated his awareness. 
It suddenly stopped being light. Glancing round at the window to 
see why, Zaphod gaped as a huge sluglike, gunmetal`green spacecraft 
crept through the air past the building. Two more followed it. 
"The government you deserted is out to get you, Zaphod," hissed 
the man, "they've sent a squadron of Frogstar Fighters." 
"Frogstar Fighters " muttered Zaphod, "Zarquon " 
"You get the picture?" 
"What are Frogstar Fighters?" Zaphod was sure he'd heard 
someone talk about them when he was President, but he never paid 
much attention to official matters. 
The man was pulling him back through a door. He went with him. 
With a searing whine a small black spider`like object shot through the 
air and disappeared down the corridor. 
"What was that?" hissed Zaphod. 
"Frogstar Scout robot class A out looking for you," said the man. 
"Hey yeah?" 
"Get down " 
From the opposite direction came a larger black spider`like object. 
It zapped past them. 
"And that was...?" 
"A Frogstar Scout robot class B out looking for you." 
"And that?" said Zaphod, as a third one seared through the air. 
"A Frogstar Scout robot class C out looking for you." 
"Hey," chuckled Zaphod to himself, "pretty stupid robots eh?" 
From over the bridge came a massive rumbling hum. A gigantic 
black shape was moving over it from the opposite tower, the size and 
shape of a tank. 
"Holy photon, what's that?" 
"A tank," said the man, "Frogstar Scout robot class D come to get 
you." 
"Should we leave?" 
"I think we should." 
"Marvin " called Zaphod. 
"What do you want?" 
Marvin rose from a pile of rubble further down the corridor and 
looked at them. 
"You see that robot coming towards us?" 
Marvin looked at the gigantic black shape edging forward towards 
them over the bridge. He looked down at his own small metal body. 
He looked back up at the tank. 
"I suppose you want me to stop it," he said. 
"Yeah." 
"Whilst you save your skins." 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "get in there " 
"Just so long," said Marvin, "as I know where I stand." 
The man tugged at Zaphod's arm, and Zaphod followed him off 
down the corridor. 
A point occurred to him about this. 
"Where are we going?" he said. 
"Zarniwoop's office." 
"Is this any time to keep an appointment?" 
"Come on." 
Chapter 7
Marvin stood at the end of the bridge corridor. He was not in fact a 
particularly small robot. His silver body gleamed in the dusty 
sunbeams and shook with the continual barrage which the building 
was still undergoing. 
He did, however, look pitifully small as the gigantic black tank 
rolled to a halt in front of him. The tank examined him with a probe. 
The probe withdrew. 
Marvin stood there. 
"Out of my way little robot," growled the tank. 
"I'm afraid," said Marvin, "that I've been left here to stop you."
The probe extended again for a quick recheck. It withdrew again. 
"You? Stop me?" roared the tank. "Go on " 
"No, really I have," said Marvin simply. 
"What are you armed with?" roared the tank in disbelief. 
"Guess," said Marvin. 
The tank's engines rumbled, its gears ground. Molecule`sized 
electronic relays deep in its micro`brain flipped backwards and 
forwards in consternation. 
"Guess?" said the tank. 
Zaphod and the as yet unnamed man lurched up one corridor, 
down a second and along a third. The building continued to rock and 
judder and this puzzled Zaphod. If they wanted to blow the building 
up, why was it taking so long? 
With difficulty they reached one of a number of totally anonymous 
unmarked doors and heaved at it. With a sudden jolt it opened and 
they fell inside. 
All this way, thought Zaphod, all this trouble, all this not`lying`on`
the`beach`having`a`wonderful`time, and for what? A single chair, a 
single desk and a single dirty ashtray in an undecorated office. The 
desk, apart from a bit of dancing dust and single, revolutionary form 
of paper clip, was empty. 
"Where," said Zaphod, "is Zarniwoop?" feeling that his already 
tenuous grasp of the point of this whole exercise was beginning to slip. 
"He's on an intergalactic cruise," said the man. 
Zaphod tried to size the man up. Earnest type, he thought, not a 
barrel of laughs. He probably apportioned a fair whack of his time to 
running up and down heaving corridors, breaking down doors and 
making cryptic remarks in empty offices. 
"Let me introduce myself," the man said, "My name is Roosta, and 
this is my towel." 
"Hello Roosta," said Zaphod. 
"Hello, towel," he added as Roosta held out to him a rather nasty 
old flowery towel. Not knowing what to do with it, he shook it by the 
corner. 
Outside the window, one of the huge slug`like, gunmetal`green 
spaceships growled past. 
"Yes, go on," said Marvin to the huge battle machine, "you'll never 
guess." 
"Errmmm..." said the machine, vibrating with unaccustomed 
thought, "laser beams?" 
Marvin shook his head solemnly. 
"No," muttered the machine in its deep guttural rumble, "Too 
obvious. Anti`matter ray?" it hazarded. 
"Far too obvious," admonished Marvin. 
"Yes," grumbled the machine, somewhat abashed, "Er... how about 
an electron ram?" 
This was new to Marvin. 
"What's that?" he said. 
"One of these," said the machine with enthusiasm. 
From its turret emerged a sharp prong which spat a single lethal 
blaze of light. Behind Marvin a wall roared and collapsed as a heap of 
dust. The dust billowed briefly, then settled. 
"No," said Marvin, "not one of those." 
"Good though, isn't it?" 
"Very good," agreed Marvin. 
"I know," said the Frogstar battle machine, after another moment's 
consideration, "you must have one of those new Xanthic Re`Structron 
Destabilized Zenon Emitters " 
"Nice, aren't they?" said Marvin. 
"That's what you've got?" said the machine in considerable awe. 
"No," said Marvin. 
"Oh," said the machine, disappointed, "then it must be..." 
"You're thinking along the wrong lines," said Marvin, "You're failing 
to take into account something fairly basic in the relationship 
between men and robots." 
"Er, I know," said the battle machine, "is it..." it tailed off into 
thought again. 
"Just think," urged Marvin, "they left me, an ordinary, menial robot, 
to stop you, a gigantic heavy`duty battle machine, whilst they ran off 
to save themselves. What do you think they would leave me with?" 
"Oooh, er," muttered the machine in alarm, "something pretty 
damn devastating I should expect." 
"Expect " said Marvin, "oh yes, expect. I'll tell you what they gave 
me to protect myself with shall I." 
"Yes, alright," said the battle machine, bracing itself. 
"Nothing," said Marvin. 
There was a dangerous pause. 
"Nothing?" roared the battle machine. 
"Nothing at all," intoned Marvin dismally, "not an electronic 
sausage." 
The machine heaved about with fury. 
"Well, doesn't that just take the biscuit " it roared, "Nothing, eh? 
Just don't think, do they?" 
"And me," said Marvin in a soft low voice, "with this terrible pain in 
all the diodes down my left side." 
"Makes you spit, doesn't it?" 
"Yes," agreed Marvin with feeling. 
"Hell that makes me angry," bellowed the machine, "think I'll 
smash that wall down " 
The electron ram stabbed out another searing blaze of light and 
took out the wall next to the machine. 
"How do you think I feel?" said Marvin bitterly. 
"Just ran off and left you, did they?" the machine thundered. 
"Yes," said Marvin. 
"I think I'll shoot down their bloody ceiling as well " raged the tank. 
It took out the ceiling of the bridge. 
"That's very impressive," murmured Marvin. 
"You ain't seeing nothing yet," promised the machine, "I can take 
out this floor too, no trouble " 
It took out the floor, too. 
"Hell's bells " the machine roared as it plummeted fifteen storeys 
and smashed itself to bits on the ground below. 
"What a depressingly stupid machine," said Marvin and trudged 
away. 
Chapter 8
"So, do we just sit here, or what?" said Zaphod angrily, "what do 
these guys out here want?" 
"You, Beeblebrox," said Roosta, "they're going to take you to the 
Frogstar ʹ the most totally evil world in the Galaxy." 
"Oh, yeah?" said Zaphod. "They'll have to come and get me first." 
"They have come and got you," said Roosta, "look out of the 
window." 
Zaphod looked, and gaped. 
"The ground's going away " he gasped, "where are they taking the 
ground?" 
"They're taking the building," said Roosta, "we're airborne." 
Clouds streaked past the office window. 
Out in the open air again Zaphod could see the ring of dark green 
Frogstar Fighters round the uprooted tower of the building. A 
network of force beams radiated in from them and held the tower in 
a firm grip. 
Zaphod shook his head in perplexity. 
"What have I done to deserve this?" he said, "I walk into a building, 
they take it away." 
"It's not what you've done they're worried about," said Roosta, "it's 
what you're going to do." 
"Well don't I get a say in that?" 
"You did, years ago. You'd better hold on, we're in for a fast and 
bumpy journey." 
"If I ever meet myself," said Zaphod, "I'll hit myself so hard I won't 
know what's hit me." 
Marvin trudged in through the door, looked at Zaphod accusingly, 
slumped in a corner and switched himself off. 
On the bridge of the Heart of Gold, all was silent. Arthur stared at 
the rack in front of him and thought. He caught Trillian's eyes as she 
looked at him inquiringly. He looked back at the rack. 
Finally he saw it. 
He picked up five small plastic squares and laid them on the board 
that lay just in front of the rack. 
The five squares had on them the five letters E, X, Q, U and I. He 
laid them next to the letters S, I, T, E. 
"Exquisite," he said, "on a triple word score. Scores rather a lot I'm 
afraid." 
The ship bumped and scattered some of the letters for the 'n'th 
time. 
Trillian sighed and started to sort them out again. 
Up and down the silent corridors echoed Ford Prefect's feet as he 
stalked the ship thumping dead instruments. 
Why did the ship keep shaking? he thought. 
Why did it rock and sway? 
Why could he not find out where they were? 
Where, basically, were they? 
The left`hand tower of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy offices 
streaked through interstellar space at a speed never equalled either 
before or since by any other office block in the Universe. 
In a room halfway up it, Zaphod Beeblebrox strode angrily. 
Roosta sat on the edge of the desk doing some routine towel 
maintenance. 
"Hey, where did you say this building was flying to?" demanded 
Zaphod. 
"The Frogstar," said Roosta, "the most totally evil place in the 
Universe." 
"Do they have food there?" said Zaphod. 
"Food? You're going to the Frogstar and you're worried about 
whether they got food?" 
"Without food I may not make it to the Frogstar." 
Out of the window, they could see nothing but the flickering light 
of the force beams, and vague green streaks which were presumably 
the distorted shapes of the Frogstar Fighters. At this speed, space 
itself was invisible, and indeed unreal. 
"Here, suck this," said Roosta, offering Zaphod his towel. 
Zaphod stared at him as if he expected a cuckoo to leap out of his 
forehead on a small spring. 
"It's soaked in nutrients," explained Roosta. 
"What are you, a messy eater or something?" said Zaphod. 
"The yellow stripes are high in protein, the green ones have vitamin 
B and C complexes, the little pink flowers contain wheatgerm 
extracts." 
Zaphod took and looked at it in amazement. 
"What are the brown stains?" he asked. 
"Bar`B`Q sauce," said Roosta, "for when I get sick of wheatgerm." 
Zaphod sniffed it doubtfully. 
Even more doubtfully, he sucked a corner. He spat it out again. 
"Ugh," he stated. 
"Yes," said Roosta, "when I've had to suck that end I usually need 
to suck the other end a bit too." 
"Why," asked Zaphod suspiciously, "what's in that?" 
"Anti`depressants," said Roosta. 
"I've gone right off this towel, you know," said Zaphod handing it 
back. 
Roosta took it back from him, swung himself off the desk, walked 
round it, sat in the chair and put his feet up. 
"Beeblebrox," he said, sticking his hands behind his head, "have 
you any idea what's going to happen to you on the Frogstar?" 
"They're going to feed me?" hazarded Zaphod hopefully. 
"They're going to feed you," said Roosta, "into the Total 
Perspective Vortex " 
Zaphod had never heard of this. He believed that he had heard of 
all the fun things in the Galaxy, so he assumed that the Total 
Perspective Vortex was not fun. He asked what it was. 
"Only," said Roosta, "the most savage psychic torture a sentinent 
being can undergo." 
Zaphod nodded a resigned nod. 
"So," he said, "no food, huh?" 
"Listen " said Roosta urgently, "you can kill a man, destroy his body, 
break his spirit, but only the Total Perspective Vortex can annihilate a 
man's soul  The treatment lasts seconds, but the effect lasts the rest 
of your life " 
"You ever had a Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster?" asked Zaphod sharply. 
"This is worse." 
"Phreeow " admitted Zaphod, much impressed. 
"Any idea why these guys might want to do this to me?" he added 
a moment later. 
"They believe it will be the best way of destroying you for ever. 
They know what you're after." 
"Could they drop me a note and let me know as well?" 
"You know," said Roosta, "you know, Beeblebrox. You want to 
meet the man who rules the Universe." 
"Can he cook?" said Zaphod. On reflection he added: 
"I doubt if he can. If he could cook a good meal he wouldn't worry 
about the rest of the Universe. I want to meet a cook." 
Roosta sighed heavily. 
"What are you doing here anyway?" demanded Zaphod, "what's all 
this got to so with you?" 
"I'm just one of those who planned this thing, along with 
Zarniwoop, along with Yooden Vranx, along with your great 
grandfather, along with you, Beeblebrox." 
"Me?" 
"Yes, you. I was told you had changed, I didn't realize how much." 
"But..." 
"I am here to do one job. I will do it before I leave you." 
"What job, man, what are you talking about?" 
"I will do it before I leave you." 
Roosta lapsed into an impenetrable silence. 
Zaphod was terribly glad. 
Chapter 9
The air around the second planet of the Frogstar system was stale 
and unwholesome. 
The dank winds that swept continually over its surface swept over 
salt flats, dried up marshland, tangled and rotting vegetation and the 
crumbling remains of ruined cities. No life moved across its surface. 
The ground, like that of many planets in this part of the Galaxy, had 
long been deserted. 
The howl of the wind was desolate enough as it gusted through the 
old decaying houses of the cities; it was more desolate as it whipped 
about the bottoms of the tall black towers that swayed uneasily here 
and there about the surface of this world. At the top of these towers 
lived colonies of large, scraggy, evil smelling birds, the sole survivors 
of the civilization that once lived here. 
The howl of the wind was at its most desolate, however, when it 
passed over a pimple of a place set in the middle of a wide grey plain 
on the outskirts of the largest of the abandoned cities. 
This pimple of a place was the thing that had earned this world the 
reputation of being the most totally evil place in the Galaxy. From 
without it was simply a steel dome about thirty feet across. From 
within it was something more monstrous than the mind can 
comprehend. 
About a hundred yards or so away, and separated from it by a 
pockmarked and blasted stretch of the most barren land imaginable 
was what would probably have to be described as a landing pad of 
sorts. That is to say that scattered over a largish area were the 
ungainly hulks of two or three dozen crash`landed buildings. 
Flitting over and around these buildings was a mind, a mind that 
was waiting for something. 
The mind directed its attention into the air, and before very long a 
distant speck appeared, surrounded by a ring of smaller specks. 
The larger speck was the left`hand tower of the Hitchhiker's Guide 
to the Galaxy office building, descending through the stratosphere of 
Frogstar World B. 
As it descended, Roosta suddenly broke the long uncomfortable 
silence that had grown up between the two men. 
He stood up and gathered his towel into a bag. He said: 
"Beeblebrox, I will now do the job I was sent here to do." 
Zaphod looked up at him from where he was sitting in a corner 
sharing unspoken thoughts with Marvin. 
"Yeah?" he said. 
"The building will shortly be landing. When you leave the building, 
do not go out of the door," said Roosta, "go out of the window." 
"Good luck," he added, and walked out of the door, disappearing 
from Zaphod's life as mysteriously as he had entered it. 
Zaphod leapt up and tried the door, but Roosta had already locked 
it. He shrugged and returned to the corner. 
Two minutes later, the building crashlanded amongst the other 
wreckage. Its escort of Frogstar Fighters deactivated their force 
beams and soared off into the air again, bound for Frogstar World A, 
an altogether more congenial spot. They never landed on Frogstar 
World B. No one did. No one ever walked on its surface other than 
the intended victims of the Total Perspective Vortex. 
Zaphod was badly shaken by the crash. He lay for a while in the 
silent dusty rubble to which most of the room had been reduced. He 
felt that he was at the lowest ebb he had ever reached in his life. He 
felt bewildered, he felt lonely, he felt unloved. Eventually he felt he 
ought to get whatever it was over with. 
He looked around the cracked and broken room. The wall had split 
round the door frame, and the door hung open. The window, by some 
miracle was closed and unbroken. For a while he hesitated, then he 
thought that if his strange and recent companion had been through 
all that he had been through just to tell him what he had told him, 
then there must be a good reason for it. With Marvin's help he got 
the window open. Outside it, the cloud of dust aroused by the crash, 
and the hulks of the other buildings with which this one was 
surrounded, effectively prevented Zaphod from seeing anything of 
the world outside. 
Not that this concerned him unduly. His main concern was what he 
saw when he looked down. Zarniwoop's office was on the fifteenth 
floor. The building had landed at a tilt of about forty`five degrees, but 
still the descent looked heart`stopping. 
Eventually, stung by the continuous series of contemptuous looks 
that Marvin appeared to be giving him, he took a deep breath and 
clambered out on to the steeply inclined side of the building. Marvin 
followed him, and together they began to crawl slowly and painfully 
down the fifteen floors that separated them from the ground. 
As he crawled, the dank air and dust choked his lungs, his eyes 
smarted and the terrifying distance down made his heads spin. 
The occasional remark from Marvin of the order of "This is the sort 
of thing you lifeforms enjoy is it? I ask merely for information," did 
little to improve his state of mind. 
About half`way down the side of the shattered building they 
stopped to rest. It seemed to Zaphod as he lay there panting with fear 
and exhaustion that Marvin seemed a mite more cheerful than usual. 
Eventually he realized this wasn't so. The robot just seemed cheerful 
in comparison with his own mood. 
A large, scraggy black bird came flapping through the slowly 
settling clouds of dust and, stretching down its scrawny legs, landed 
on an inclined window ledge a couple of yards from Zaphod. It folded 
its ungainly wings and teetered awkwardly on its perch. 
Its wingspan must have been something like six feet, and its head 
and neck seemed curiously large for a bird. Its face was flat, the beak 
underdeveloped, and half`way along the underside of its wings the 
vestiges of something handlike could be clearly seen. 
In fact, it looked almost human. 
It turned its heavy eyes on Zaphod and clicked its beak in a 
desultory fashion. 
"Go away," said Zaphod. 
"OK," muttered the bird morosely and flapped off into the dust 
again. 
Zaphod watched its departure in bewilderment. 
"Did that bird just talk to me?" he asked Marvin nervously. He was 
quite prepared to believe the alternative explanation, that he was in 
fact hallucinating. 
"Yes," confirmed Marvin. 
"Poor souls," said a deep, ethereal voice in Zaphod's ear. 
Twisting round violently to find the source of the voice nearly 
caused Zaphod to fall off the building. He grabbed savagely at a 
protruding window fitting and cut his hand on it. He hung on, 
breathing heavily. 
The voice had no visible source whatever ʹ there was no one there. 
Nevertheless, it spoke again. 
"A tragic history behind them, you know. A terrible blight." 
Zaphod looked wildly about. The voice was deep and quiet. In 
other circumstances it would even be described as soothing. There is, 
however, nothing soothing about being addressed by a disembodied 
voice out of nowhere, particularly if you are, like Zaphod Beeblebrox, 
not at your best and hanging from a ledge eight storeys up a crashed 
building. 
"Hey, er..." he stammered. 
"Shall I tell you their story?" inquired the voice quietly. 
"Hey, who are you?" panted Zaphod. "Where are you?" 
"Later then, perhaps," murmured the voice. "I am Gargravarr. I am 
the Custodian of the Total Perspective Vortex." 
"Why can't I see..." 
"You will find your progress down the building greatly facilitated," 
the voice lifted, "if you move about two yards to your left. Why don't 
you try it?" 
Zaphod looked and saw a series of short horizontal grooves leading 
all the way down the side of the building. Gratefully he shifted himself 
across to them. 
"Why don't I see you again at the bottom?" said the voice in his ear, 
and as it spoke it faded. 
"Hey," called out Zaphod, "Where are you..." 
"It'll only take a couple of minutes..." said the voice very faintly. 
"Marvin," said Zaphod earnestly to the robot squatting dejectedly 
next to him, "Did a... did a voice just..." 
"Yes," Marvin replied tersely. 
Zaphod nodded. He took out his Peril Sensitive Sunglasses again. 
They were completely black, and by now quite badly scratched by the 
unexpected metal object in his pocket. He put them on. He would find 
his way down the building more comfortably if he didn't actually have 
to look at what he was doing. 
Minutes later he clambered over the ripped and mangled 
foundations of the building and, once more removing his sunglasses, 
he dropped to the ground. 
Marvin joined him a moment or so later and lay face down in the 
dust and rubble, from which position he seemed too disinclined to 
move. 
"Ah, there you are," said the voice suddenly in Zaphod's ear, 
"excuse me leaving you like that, it's just that I have a terrible head 
for heights. At least," it added wistfully, "I did have a terrible head for 
heights." 
Zaphod looked around slowly and carefully, just to see if he had 
missed something which might be the source of the voice. All he saw, 
however, was the dust, the rubble and the towering hulks of the 
encircling buildings. 
"Hey, er, why can't I see you?" he said, "why aren't you here?" 
"I am here," said the voice slowly, "my body wanted to come but 
it's a bit busy at the moment. Things to do, people to see." After what 
seemed like a sort of ethereal sigh it added, "You know how it is with 
bodies." 
Zaphod wasn't sure about this. 
"I thought I did," he said. 
"I only hope it's gone for a rest cure," continued the voice, "the 
way it's been living recently it must be on its last elbows." 
"Elbows?" said Zaphod, "don't you mean last legs?" 
The voice said nothing for a while. Zaphod looked around uneasily. 
He didn't know if it was gone or was still there or what it was doing. 
Then the voice spoke again. 
"So, you are to be put into the Vortex, yes?" 
"Er, well," said Zaphod with a very poor attempt at nonchalance, 
"this cat's in no hurry, you know. I can just slouch about and take in a 
look at the local scenery, you know?" 
"Have you seen the local scenery?" asked the voice of Gargravarr. 
"Er, no." 
Zaphod clambered over the rubble, and rounded the corner of one 
of the wrecked buildings that was obscuring his view. 
He looked out at the landscape of Frogstar World B. 
"Ah, OK," he said, "I'll just sort of slouch about then." 
"No," said Gargravarr, "the Vortex is ready for you now. You must 
come. Follow me." 
"Er, yeah?" said Zaphod, "and how am I meant to do that?" 
"I'll hum for you," said Gargravarr, "follow the humming." 
A soft keening sound drifted through the air, a pale, sad sound that 
seemed to be without any kind of focus. It was only by listening very 
carefully that Zaphod was able to detect the direction from which it 
was coming. Slowly, dazedly, he stumbled off in its wake. What else 
was there to do? 
Chapter 10
The Universe, as has been observed before, is an unsettlingly big 
place, a fact which for the sake of a quiet life most people tend to 
ignore. 
Many would happily move to somewhere rather smaller of their 
own devising, and this is what most beings in fact do. 
For instance, in one corner of the Eastern Galactic Arm lies the 
large forest planet Oglaroon, the entire "intelligent" population of 
which lives permanently in one fairly small and crowded nut tree. In 
which tree they are born, live, fall in love, carve tiny speculative 
articles in the bark on the meaning of life, the futility of death and the 
importance of birth control, fight a few extremely minor wars, and 
eventually die strapped to the underside of some of the less 
accessible outer branches. 
In fact the only Oglaroonians who ever leave their tree are those 
who are hurled out of it for the heinous crime of wondering whether 
any of the other trees might be capable of supporting life at all, or 
indeed whether the other trees are anything other than illusions 
brought on by eating too many Oglanuts. 
Exotic though this behaviour may seem, there is no life form in the 
Galaxy which is not in some way guilty of the same thing, which is 
why the Total Perspective Vortex is as horrific as it is. 
For when you are put into the Vortex you are given just one 
momentary glimpse of the entire unimaginable infinity of creation, 
and somewhere in it a tiny little marker, a microscopic dot on a 
microscopic dot, which says "You are here." 
The grey plain stretched before Zaphod, a ruined, shattered plain. 
The wind whipped wildly over it. 
Visible in the middle was the steel pimple of the dome. This, 
gathered Zaphod, was where he was going. This was the Total 
Perspective Vortex. 
As he stood and gazed bleakly at it, a sudden inhuman wail of 
terror emanated from it as of a man having his soul burnt from his 
body. It screamed above the wind and died away. 
Zaphod started with fear and his blood seemed to turn to liquid 
helium. 
"Hey, what was that?" he muttered voicelessly. 
"A recording," said Gargravarr, "of the last man who was put in the 
Vortex. It is always played to the next victim. A sort of prelude." 
"Hey, it really sounds bad..." stammered Zaphod, "couldn't we 
maybe slope off to a party or something for a while, think it over?" 
"For all I know," said Gargravarr's ethereal voice, "I'm probably at 
one. My body that is. It goes to a lot of parties without me. Says I only 
get in the way. Hey ho." 
"What is all this with your body?" said Zaphod, anxious to delay 
whatever it was that was going to happen to him. 
"Well, it's... it's busy you know," said Gargravarr hesitantly. 
"You mean it's got a mind of its own?" said Zaphod. 
There was a long and slightly chilly pause before Gargravarr spoke 
again. 
"I have to say," he replied eventually, "that I find that remark in 
rather poor taste." 
Zaphod muttered a bewildered and embarrassed apology. 
"No matter," said Gargravarr, "you weren't to know." 
The voice fluttered unhappily. 
"The truth is," it continued in tones which suggested he was trying 
very hard to keep it under control, "the truth is that we are currently 
undergoing a period of legal trial separation. I suspect it will end in 
divorce." 
The voice was still again, leaving Zaphod with no idea of what to 
say. He mumbled uncertainly. 
"I think we are probably not very well suited," said Gargravarr 
again at length, "we never seemed to be happy doing the same things. 
We always had the greatest arguments over sex and fishing. 
Eventually we tried to combine the two, but that only led to disaster, 
as you can probably imagine. And now my body refuses to let me in. It 
won't even see me..." 
He paused again, tragically. The wind whipped across the plain. 
"It says I only inhibit it. I pointed out that in fact I was meant to 
inhibit it, and it said that that was exactly the sort of smart alec 
remark that got right up a body's left nostril, and so we left it. It will 
probably get custody of my forename." 
"Oh..." said Zaphod faintly, "and what's that?" 
"Pizpot," said the voice, "My name is Pizpot Gargravarr. Says it all 
really doesn't it?" 
"Errr..." said Zaphod sympathetically. 
"And that is why I, as a disembodied mind, have this job, Custodian 
of the Total Perspective Vortex. No one will ever walk on the ground 
of this planet. Except the victims of the Vortex ʹ they don't really 
count I'm afraid." 
"Ah..." 
"I'll tell you the story. Would you like to hear it?" 
"Er..." 
"Many years ago this was a thriving, happy planet ʹ people, cities 
shops, a normal world. Except that on the high streets of these cities 
there were slightly more shoe shops than one might have thought 
necessary. And slowly, insidiously, the numbers of these shoe shops 
were increasing. It's a well known economic phenomenon but tragic 
to see it in operation, for the more shoe shops there were, the more 
shoes they had to make and the worse and more unwearable they 
became. And the worse they were to wear, the more people had to 
buy to keep themselves shod, and the more the shops proliferated, 
until the whole economy of the place passed what I believe is termed 
the Shoe Event Horizon, and it became no longer economically 
possible to build anything other than shoe shops. Result ʹ collapse, 
ruin and famine. Most of the population died out. Those few who had 
the right kind of genetic instability mutated into birds ʹ you've seen 
one of them ʹ who cursed their feet, cursed the ground, and vowed 
that none should walk on it again. Unhappy lot. Come, I must take you 
to the Vortex." 
Zaphod shook his head in bemusement and stumbled forward 
across the plain. 
"And you," he said, "you come from this hellhole pit do you?" 
"No no," said Gargravarr, taken aback, "I come from the Frogstar 
World C. Beautiful place. Wonderful fishing. I flit back there in the 
evenings. Though all I can do now is watch. The Total Perspective 
Vortex is the only thing on this planet with any function. It was built 
here because no one else wanted it on their doorstep." 
At that moment another dismal scream rent the air and Zaphod 
shuddered. 
"What can do that to a guy?" he breathed. 
"The Universe," said Gargravarr simply, "the whole infinite 
Universe. The infinite suns, the infinite distances between them, and 
yourself an invisible dot on an invisible dot, infinitely small." 
"Hey, I'm Zaphod Beeblebrox, man, you know," muttered Zaphod 
trying to flap the last remnants of his ego. 
Gargravarr made no reply, but merely resumed his mournful 
humming till they reached the tarnished steel dome in the middle of 
the plain. 
As they reached it, a door hummed open in the side, revealing a 
small darkened chamber within. 
"Enter," said Gargravarr. 
Zaphod started with fear. 
"Hey, what, now?" he said. 
"Now." 
Zaphod peered nervously inside. The chamber was very small. It 
was steel`lined and there was hardly space in it for more than one 
man. 
"It... er... it doesn't look like any kind of Vortex to me," said Zaphod. 
"It isn't," said Gargravarr, "it's just the elevator. Enter." 
With infinite trepidation Zaphod stepped into it. He was aware of 
Gargravarr being in the elevator with him, though the disembodied 
man was not for the moment speaking. 
The elevator began its descent. 
"I must get myself into the right frame of mind for this," muttered 
Zaphod. 
"There is no right frame of mind," said Gargravarr sternly. 
"You really know how to make a guy feel inadequate." 
"I don't. The Vortex does." 
At the bottom of the shaft, the rear of the elevator opened up and 
Zaphod stumbled out into a smallish, functional, steel`lined chamber. 
At the far side of it stood a single upright steel box, just large 
enough for a man to stand in. 
It was that simple. 
It connected to a small pile of components and instruments via a 
single thick wire. 
"Is that it?" said Zaphod in surprise. 
"That is it." 
Didn't look too bad, thought Zaphod. 
"And I get in there do I?" said Zaphod. 
"You get in there," said Gargravarr, "and I'm afraid you must do it 
now." 
"OK, OK," said Zaphod. 
He opened the door of the box and stepped in. 
Inside the box he waited. 
After five seconds there was a click, and the entire Universe was 
there in the box with him. 
Chapter 11
The Total Perspective Vortex derives its picture of the whole 
Universe on the principle of extrapolated matter analyses. 
To explain ʹ since every piece of matter in the Universe is in some 
way affected by every other piece of matter in the Universe, it is in 
theory possible to extrapolate the whole of creation ʹ every sun, 
every planet, their orbits, their composition and their economic and 
social history from, say, one small piece of fairy cake. 
The man who invented the Total Perspective Vortex did so basically 
in order to annoy his wife. 
Trin Tragula ʹ for that was his name ʹ was a dreamer, a thinker, a 
speculative philosopher or, as his wife would have it, an idiot. 
And she would nag him incessantly about the utterly inordinate 
amount of time he spent staring out into space, or mulling over the 
mechanics of safety pins, or doing spectrographic analyses of pieces 
of fairy cake. 
"Have some sense of proportion " she would say, sometimes as 
often as thirty`eight times in a single day. 
And so he built the Total Perspective Vortex ʹ just to show her. 
And into one end he plugged the whole of reality as extrapolated 
from a piece of fairy cake, and into the other end he plugged his wife: 
so that when he turned it on she saw in one instant the whole infinity 
of creation and herself in relation to it. 
To Trin Tragula's horror, the shock completely annihilated her brain; 
but to his satisfaction he realized that he had proved conclusively that 
if life is going to exist in a Universe of this size, then the one thing it 
cannot afford to have is a sense of proportion. 
The door of the Vortex swung open. 
From his disembodied mind Gargravarr watched dejectedly. He had 
rather liked Zaphod Beeblebrox in a strange sort of way. He was 
clearly a man of many qualities, even if they were mostly bad ones. 
He waited for him to flop forwards out of the box, as they all did. 
Instead, he stepped out. 
"Hi " he said. 
"Beeblebrox..." gasped Gargravarr's mind in amazement. 
"Could I have a drink please?" said Zaphod. 
"You... you... have been in the Vortex?" stammered Gargravarr. 
"You saw me, kid." 
"And it was working?" 
"Sure was." 
"And you saw the whole infinity of creation?" 
"Sure. Really neat place, you know that?" 
Gargravarr's mind was reeling in astonishment. Had his body been 
with him it would have sat down heavily with its mouth hanging open. 
"And you saw yourself," said Gargravarr, "in relation to it all?" 
"Oh, yeah, yeah." 
"But... what did you experience?" 
Zaphod shrugged smugly. 
"It just told me what I knew all the time. I'm a really terrific and 
great guy. Didn't I tell you, baby, I'm Zaphod Beeblebrox " 
His gaze passed over the machinery which powered the vortex and 
suddenly stopped, startled. 
He breathed heavily. 
"Hey," he said, "is that really a piece of fairy cake?" 
He ripped the small piece of confectionery from the sensors with 
which it was surrounded. 
"If I told you how much I needed this," he said ravenously, "I 
wouldn't have time to eat it." 
He ate it. 
Chapter 12
A short while later he was running across the plain in the direction 
of the ruined city. 
The dank air wheezed heavily in his lungs and he frequently 
stumbled with the exhaustion he was still feeling. Night was beginning 
to fall too, and the rough ground was treacherous. 
The elation of his recent experience was still with him though. The 
whole Universe. He had seen the whole Universe stretching to infinity 
around him ʹ everything. And with it had come the clear and 
extraordinary knowledge that he was the most important thing in it. 
Having a conceited ego is one thing. Actually being told by a machine 
is another. 
He didn't have time to reflect on this matter. 
Gargravarr had told him that he would have to alert his masters as 
to what had happened, but that he was prepared to leave a decent 
interval before doing so. Enough time for Zaphod to make a break and 
find somewhere to hide. 
What he was going to do he didn't know, but feeling that he was 
the most important person in the Universe gave him the confidence 
to believe that something would turn up. 
Nothing else on this blighted planet could give him much grounds 
for optimism. 
He ran on, and soon reached the outskirts of the abandoned city. 
He walked along cracked and gaping roads riddled with scrawny 
weeds, the holes filled with rotting shoes. The buildings he passed 
were so crumbled and decrepit he thought it unsafe to enter any of 
them. Where could he hide? He hurried on. 
After a while the remains of a wide sweeping road led off from the 
one down which he was walking, and at its end lay a vast low building, 
surrounded with sundry smaller ones, the whole surrounded by the 
remains of a perimeter barrier. The large main building still seemed 
reasonably solid, and Zaphod turned off to see if it might provide him 
with... well with anything. 
He approached the building. Along one side of it ʹ the front it 
would seem since it faced a wide concreted apron area ʹ were three 
gigantic doors, maybe sixty feet high. The far one of these was open, 
and towards this, Zaphod ran. 
Inside, all was gloom, dust and confusion. Giant cobwebs lay over 
everything. Part of the infrastructure of the building had collapsed, 
part of the rear wall had caved in, and a thick choking dust lay inches 
over the floor. 
Through the heavy gloom huge shapes loomed, covered with 
debris. 
The shapes were sometimes cylindrical, sometimes bulbous, 
sometimes like eggs, or rather cracked eggs. Most of them were split 
open or falling apart, some were mere skeletons. 
They were all spacecraft, all derelict. 
Zaphod wandered in frustration among the hulks. There was 
nothing here that remotely approached the serviceable. Even the 
mere vibration of his footsteps caused one precarious wreck to 
collapse further into itself. 
Towards the rear of the building lay one old ship, slightly larger 
than the others, and buried beneath even deeper piles of dust and 
cobwebs. Its outline, however, seemed unbroken. Zaphod 
approached it with interest, and as he did so, he tripped over an old 
feedline. 
He tried to toss the feedline aside, and to his surprise discovered 
that it was still connected to the ship. 
To his utter astonishment he realized that the feedline was also 
humming slightly. 
He stared at the ship in disbelief, and then back down at the 
feedline in his hands. 
He tore off his jacket and threw it aside. Crawling along on his 
hands and knees he followed the feedline to the point where it 
connected with the ship. The connection was sound, and the slight 
humming vibration was more distinct. 
His heart was beating fast. He wiped away some grime and laid an 
ear against the ship's side. He could only hear a faint, indeterminate 
noise. 
He rummaged feverishly amongst the debris lying on the floor all 
about him and found a short length of tubing, and a non`
biodegradable plastic cup. Out of this he fashioned a crude 
stethoscope and placed it against the side of the ship. 
What he heard made his brains turn somersaults. 
The voice said: 
"Transtellar Cruise Lines would like to apologize to passengers for 
the continuing delay to this flight. We are currently awaiting the 
loading of our complement of small lemon`soaked paper napkins for 
your comfort, refreshment and hygiene during the journey. 
Meanwhile we thank you for your patience. The cabin crew will 
shortly be serving coffee and biscuits again." 
Zaphod staggered backwards, staring wildly at the ship. 
He walked around for a few moments in a daze. In so doing he 
suddenly caught sight of a giant departure board still hanging, but by 
only one support, from the ceiling above him. It was covered with 
grime, but some of the figures were still discernible. 
Zaphod's eyes searched amongst the figures, then made some brief 
calculations. His eyes widened. 
"Nine hundred years..." he breathed to himself. That was how late 
the ship was. 
Two minutes later he was on board. 
As he stepped out of the airlock, the air that greeted him was cool 
and fresh ʹ the air conditioning was still working. 
The lights were still on. 
He moved out of the small entrance chamber into a short narrow 
corridor and stepped nervously down it. 
Suddenly a door opened and a figure stepped out in front of him. 
"Please return to your seat sir," said the android stewardess and, 
turning her back on him, she walked on down the corridor in front of 
him. 
When his heart had started beating again he followed her. She 
opened the door at the end of the corridor and walked through. 
He followed her through the door. 
They were now in the passenger compartment and Zaphod's heart 
stopped still again for a moment. 
In every seat sat a passenger, strapped into his or her seat. 
The passengers' hair was long and unkempt, their fingernails were 
long, the men wore beards. 
All of them were quite clearly alive ʹ but sleeping. 
Zaphod had the creeping horrors. 
He walked slowly down the aisle as in a dream. By the time he was 
half`way down the aisle, the stewardess had reached the other end. 
She turned and spoke. 
"Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen," she said sweetly, "Thank 
you for bearing with us during this slight delay. We will be taking off 
as soon as we possibly can. If you would like to wake up now I will 
serve you coffee and biscuits." 
There was a slight hum. 
At that moment, all the passengers awoke. 
They awoke screaming and clawing at their straps and life support 
systems that held them tightly in their seats. They screamed and 
bawled and hollered till Zaphod thought his ears would shatter. 
They struggled and writhed as the stewardess patiently moved up 
the aisle placing a small cup of coffee and a packet of biscuits in front 
of each one of them. 
Then one of them rose from his seat. 
He turned and looked at Zaphod. 
Zaphod's skin was crawling all over his body as if it was trying to get 
off. He turned and ran from the bedlam. 
He plunged through the door and back into the corridor. 
The man pursued him. 
He raced in a frenzy to the end of the corridor, through the 
entrance chamber and beyond. He arrived on the flight deck, 
slammed and bolted the door behind him. He leant back against the 
door breathing hard. 
Within seconds, a hand started beating on the door. 
From somewhere on the flight deck a metallic voice addressed him. 
"Passengers are not allowed on the flight deck. Please return to 
your seat, and wait for the ship to take off. Coffee and biscuits are 
being served. This is your autopilot speaking. Please return to your 
seat." 
Zaphod said nothing. He breathed hard, behind him, the hand 
continued to knock on the door. 
"Please return to your seat," repeated the autopilot. "Passengers 
are not allowed on the flight deck." 
"I'm not a passenger," panted Zaphod. 
"Please return to your seat." 
"I am not a passenger " shouted Zaphod again. 
"Please return to your seat." 
"I am not a... hello, can you hear me?" 
"Please return to your seat." 
You're the autopilot?" said Zaphod. 
"Yes," said the voice from the flight console. 
"You're in charge of this ship?" 
"Yes," said the voice again, "there has been a delay. Passengers are 
to be kept temporarily in suspended animation, for their comfort and 
convenience. Coffee and biscuits are being served every year, after 
which passengers are returned to suspended animation for their 
continued comfort and convenience. Departure will take place when 
the flight stores are complete. We apologize for the delay." 
Zaphod moved away from the door, on which the pounding had 
now ceased. He approached the flight console. 
"Delay?" he cried, "Have you seen the world outside this ship? It's a 
wasteland, a desert. Civilization's been and gone, man. There are no 
lemon`soaked paper napkins on the way from anywhere " 
"The statistical likelihood," continued the autopilot primly, "is that 
other civilizations will arise. There will one day be lemon`soaked 
paper napkins. Till then there will be a short delay. Please return to 
your seat." 
"But..." 
But at that moment the door opened. Zaphod span round to see 
the man who had pursued him standing there. He carried a large 
briefcase. He was smartly dressed, and his hair was short. He had no 
beard and no long fingernails. 
"Zaphod Beeblebrox," he said, "My name is Zarniwoop. I believe 
you wanted to see me." 
Zaphod Beeblebrox wittered. His mouths said foolish things. He 
dropped into a chair. 
"Oh man, oh man, where did you spring from?" he said. 
"I've been waiting here for you," he said in a businesslike tone. 
He put the briefcase down and sat in another chair. 
"I am glad you followed instructions," he said, "I was a bit nervous 
that you might have left my office by the door rather than the 
window. Then you would have been in trouble." 
Zaphod shook his heads at him and burbled. 
"When you entered the door of my office, you entered my 
electronically synthesized Universe," he explained, "if you had left by 
the door you would have been back in the real one. The artificial one 
works from here." 
He patted the briefcase smugly. 
Zaphod glared at him with resentment and loathing. 
"What's the difference?" he muttered. 
"Nothing," said Zarniwoop, "they are identical. Oh ʹ except that I 
think the Frogstar Fighters are grey in the real Universe." 
"What's going on?" spat Zaphod. 
"Simple," said Zarniwoop. His self assurance and smugness made 
Zaphod seethe. 
"Very simple," repeated Zarniwoop, "I discovered the coordinated 
at which this man could be found ʹ the man who rules the Universe, 
and discovered that his world was protected by an Unprobability field. 
To protect my secret ʹ and myself ʹ I retreated to the safety of this 
totally artificial Universe and hid myself away in a forgotten cruise 
liner. I was secure. Meanwhile, you and I..." 
"You and I?" said Zaphod angrily, "you mean I knew you?" 
"Yes," said Zarniwoop, "we knew each other well." 
"I had no taste," said Zaphod and resumed a sullen silence. 
"Meanwhile, you and I arranged that you would steal the 
Improbability Drive ship ʹ the only one which could reach the ruler's 
world ʹ and bring it to me here. This you have now done I trust, and I 
congratulate you." He smiled a tight little smile which Zaphod wanted 
to hit with a brick. 
"Oh, and in case you were wondering," added Zarniwoop, "this 
Universe was created specifically for you to come to. You are 
therefore the most important person in this Universe. You would 
never," he said with an even more brickable smile, "have survived the 
Total Perspective Vortex in the real one. Shall we go?" 
"Where?" said Zaphod sullenly. He felt collapsed. 
"To your ship. The Heart of Gold. You did bring it I trust?" 
"No." 
"Where is your jacket?" 
Zaphod looked at him in mystification. 
"My jacket? I took it off. It's outside." 
"Good, we will go and find it." 
Zarniwoop stood up and gestured to Zaphod to follow him. 
Out in the entrance chamber again, they could hear the screams of 
the passengers being fed coffee and biscuits. 
"It has not been a pleasant experience waiting for you," said 
Zarniwoop. 
"Not pleasant for you " bawled Zaphod, "How do you think..." 
Zarniwoop held up a silencing finger as the hatchway swung open. 
A few feet away from them they could see Zaphod's jacket lying in the 
debris. 
"A very remarkable and very powerful ship," said Zarniwoop, 
"watch." 
As they watched, the pocket on the jacket suddenly bulged. It split, 
it ripped. The small metal model of the Heart of Gold that Zaphod had 
been bewildered to discover in his pocket was growing. 
It grew, it continued to grow. It reached, after two minutes, its full 
size. 
"At an Improbability Level," said Zarniwoop, "of... oh I don't know, 
but something very large." 
Zaphod swayed. 
"You mean I had it with me all the time?" 
"Zarniwoop smiled. He lifted up his briefcase and opened it. 
He twisted a single switch inside it. 
"Goodbye artificial Universe," he said, "hello real one " 
The scene before them shimmered briefly ʹ and reappeared 
exactly as before. 
"You see?" said Zarniwoop, "exactly the same." 
"You mean," repeated Zaphod tautly, "that I had it with me all the 
time?" 
"Oh yes," said Zarniwoop, "of course. That was the whole point." 
"That's it," said Zaphod, "you can count me out, from hereon in you 
can count me out. I've had all I want of this. You play your own 
games." 
"I'm afraid you cannot leave," said Zarniwoop, "you are entwined 
in the Improbability field. You cannot escape." 
He smiled the smile that Zaphod had wanted to hit and this time 
Zaphod hit it. 
Chapter 13
Ford Prefect bounded up to the bridge of the Heart of Gold. 
"Trillian  Arthur " he shouted, "it's working  The ship's 
reactivated " 
Trillian and Arthur were asleep on the floor. 
"Come on you guys, we're going off, we're off," he said kicking 
them awake. 
"Hi there guys " twittered the computer, "it's really great to be 
back with you again, I can tell you, and I just want to say that..." 
"Shut up," said Ford, "tell us where the hell we are." 
"Frogstar World B, and man it's a dump," said Zaphod running on 
to the bridge, "hi, guys, you must be so amazingly glad to see me you 
don't even find words to tell me what a cool frood I am." 
"What a what?" said Arthur blearily, picking himself up from the 
floor and not taking any of this in. 
"I know how you feel," said Zaphod, "I'm so great even I get 
tongue`tied talking to myself. Hey it's good to see you Trillian, Ford, 
Monkeyman. Hey, er, computer...?" 
"Hi there, Mr. Beeblebrox sir, sure is a great honor to..." 
"Shut up and get us out of here, fast fast fast." 
"Sure thing, fella, where do you want to go?" 
"Anywhere, doesn't matter," shouted Zaphod, "yes it does " he 
said again, "we want to go to the nearest place to eat " 
"Sure thing," said the computer happily and a massive explosion 
rocket the bridge. 
When Zarniwoop entered a minute or so later with a black eye, he 
regarded the four wisps of smoke with interest. 
Chapter 14
Four inert bodies sank through spinning blackness. Consciousness 
had died, cold oblivion pulled the bodies down and down into the pit 
of unbeing. The roar of silence echoed dismally around them and they 
sank at last into a dark and bitter sea of heaving red that slowly 
engulfed them, seemingly for ever. 
After what seemed an eternity the sea receded and left them lying 
on a cold hard shore, the flotsam and jetsam of the stream of Life, the 
Universe, and Everything. 
Cold spasms shook them, lights danced sickeningly around them. 
The cold hard shore tipped and span and then stood still. It shone 
darkly ʹ it was a very highly polished cold hard shore. 
A green blur watched them disapprovingly. 
It coughed. 
"Good evening, madam, gentlemen," it said, "do you have a 
reservation?" 
Ford Prefect's consciousness snapped back like elastic, making his 
brain smart. He looked up woozily at the green blur. 
"Reservation?" he said weakly. 
"Yes, sir," said the green blur. 
"Do you need a reservation for the afterlife?" 
In so far as it is possible for a green blur to arch its eyebrows 
disdainfully, this is what the green blur now did. 
"Afterlife, sir?" it said. 
Arthur Dent was grappling with his consciousness the way one 
grapples with a lost bar of soap in the bath. 
"Is this the afterlife?" he stammered. 
"Well I assume so," said Ford Prefect trying to work out which way 
was up. He tested the theory that it must lie in the opposite direction 
from the cold hard shore on which he was lying, and staggered to 
what he hoped were his feet. 
"I mean," he said, swaying gently, "there's no way we could have 
survived that blast is there?" 
"No," muttered Arthur. He had raised himself on to his elbows but 
it didn't seem to improve things. He slumped down again. 
"No," said Trillian, standing up, "no way at all." 
A dull hoarse gurgling sound came from the floor. It was Zaphod 
Beeblebrox attempting to speak. "I certainly didn't survive," he 
gurgled, "I was a total goner. Wham bang and that was it." 
"Yeah, thanks to you," said Ford, "We didn't stand a chance. We 
must have been blown to bits. Arms, legs everywhere." 
"Yeah," said Zaphod struggling noisily to his feet. 
"If the lady and gentlemen would like to order drinks..." said the 
green blur, hovering impatiently beside them. 
"Kerpow, splat," continued Zaphod, "instantaneously zonked into 
our component molecules. Hey, Ford," he said, identifying one of the 
slowly solidifying blurs around him, "did you get that thing of your 
whole life flashing before you?" 
"You got that too?" said Ford, "your whole life?" 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, "at least I assume it was mine. I spent a lot of 
time out of my skulls you know." 
He looked at around him at the various shapes that were at last 
becoming proper shapes instead of vague and wobbling shapeless 
shapes. 
"So..." he said. 
"So what?" said Ford. 
"So here we are," said Zaphod hesitantly, "lying dead..." 
"Standing," Trillian corrected him. 
"Er, standing dead," continued Zaphod, "in this desolate..." 
"Restaurant," said Arthur Dent who had got to his feet and could 
now, much to his surprise, see clearly. That is to say, the thing that 
surprised him was not that he could see, but what he could see. 
"Here we are," continued Zaphod doggedly, "standing dead in this 
desolate..." 
"Five star..." said Trillian. 
"Restaurant," concluded Zaphod. 
"Odd isn't it?" said Ford. 
"Er, yeah." 
"Nice chandeliers though," said Trillian. 
They looked about themselves in bemusement. 
"It's not so much an afterlife," said Arthur, "more a sort of après 
vie." 
The chandeliers were in fact a little on the flashy side and the low 
vaulted ceiling from which they hung would not, in an ideal Universe, 
have been painted in that particular shade of deep turquoise, and 
even if it had been it wouldn't have been highlighted by concealed 
moodlighting. This is not, however, an ideal Universe, as was further 
evidenced by the eye`crossing patterns of the inlaid marble floor, and 
the way in which the fronting for the eighty`yard long marble`topped 
bar had been made. The fronting for the eighty`yard long marble`
topped bar had been made by stitching together nearly twenty 
thousand Antarean Mosaic Lizard skins, despite the fact that the 
twenty thousand lizards concerned had needed them to keep their 
insides in. 
A few smartly dressed creatures were lounging casually at the bar 
or relaxing in the richly coloured body`hugging seats that were 
deployed here and there about the bar area. A young Vl'Hurg officer 
and his green steaming young lady passed through the large smoked 
glass doors at the far end of the bar into the dazzling light of the main 
body of the Restaurant beyond. 
Behind Arthur was a large curtained bay window. He pulled aside 
the corner of the curtain and looked out at a landscape which under 
normal circumstances would have given Arthur the creeping horrors. 
These were not, however, normal circumstances, for the thing that 
froze his blood and made his skin try to crawl up his back and off the 
top of his head was the sky. The sky was... 
An attendant flunkey politely drew the curtain back into place. 
"All in good time, sir," he said. 
Zaphod's eyes flashed. 
"Hey, hang about you dead guys," he said, "I think we're missing 
some ultra`important thing here you know. Something somebody said 
and we missed it." 
Arthur was profoundly relieved to turn his attention from what he 
had just seen. 
He said, "I said it was a sort of après..." 
"Yeah, and don't you wish you hadn't?" said Zaphod, "Ford?" 
"I said it was odd." 
"Yeah, shrewd but dull, perhaps it was..." 
"Perhaps," interrupted the green blur who had by this time 
resolved into the shape of a small wizened dark`suited green waiter, 
"perhaps you would care to discuss the matter over drinks..." 
"Drinks " cried Zaphod, "that was it  See what you miss if you don't 
stay alert." 
"Indeed sir," said the waiter patiently. "If the lady and gentlemen 
would care to order drinks before dinner..." 
"Dinner " Zaphod exclaimed with passion, "Listen, little green 
person, my stomach could take you home and cuddle you all night for 
the mere idea." 
"... and the Universe," concluded the waiter, determined not to be 
deflected on his home stretch, "will explode later for your pleasure." 
Ford's head swivelled towards him. He spoke with feeling. 
"Wow," he said, "What sort of drinks do you serve in this place?" 
The waiter laughed a polite little waiter's laugh. 
"Ah," he said, "I think sir has perhaps misunderstood me." 
"Oh, I hope not," breathed Ford. 
The waiter coughed a polite little waiter's cough. 
"It is not unusual for our customers to be a little disoriented by the 
time journey," he said, "so if I might suggest..." 
"Time journey?" said Zaphod. 
"Time journey?" said Ford. 
"Time journey?" said Trillian. 
"You mean this isn't the afterlife?" said Arthur. 
The waiter smiled a polite little waiter's smile. He had almost 
exhausted his polite little waiter repertoire and would soon be 
slipping into his role of a rather tight lipped and sarcastic little waiter. 
"Afterlife sir?" he said, "No sir." 
"And we're not dead?" said Arthur. 
The waiter tightened his lips. 
"Aha, ha," he said, "Sir is most evidently alive, otherwise I would 
not attempt to serve sir." 
In an extraordinary gesture which is pointless attempting to 
describe, Zaphod Beeblebrox slapped both his foreheads with two of 
his arms and one of his thighs with the other. 
"Hey guys," he said, "This is crazy. We finally did it. We finally got 
to where we were going. This is Milliways " 
"Yes sir," said the waiter, laying on the patience with a trowel, "this 
is Milliways ʹ the Restaurant at the End of the Universe." 
"End of what?" said Arthur. 
"The Universe," repeated the waiter, very clearly and unnecessarily 
distinctly. 
"When did that end?" said Arthur. 
"In just a few minutes, sir," said the waiter. He took a deep breath. 
He didn't need to do this since his body was supplied with the 
peculiar assortment of gases it required for survival from a small
intravenous device strapped to his leg. There are times, however, 
when whatever your metabolism you have to take a deep breath. 
"Now, if you would care to order drinks at last," he said, "I will then 
show you to your table." 
Zaphod grinned two manic grins, sauntered over to the bar and 
bought most of it. 
Chapter 15
The Restaurant at the End of the Universe is one of the most 
extraordinary ventures in the entire history of catering. It has been 
built on the fragmented remains of... it will be built on the 
fragmented... that is to say it will have been built by this time, and 
indeed has been ʹ
One of the major problems encountered in time travel is not that 
of accidentally becoming your own father or mother. There is no 
problem involved in becoming your own father or mother that a 
broadminded and well`adjusted family can't cope with. There is also 
no problem about changing the course of history ʹ the course of 
history does not change because it all fits together like a jigsaw. All 
the important changes have happened before the things they were 
supposed to change and it all sorts itself out in the end. 
The major problem is quite simply one of grammar, and the main 
work to consult in this matter is Dr. Dan Streetmentioner's Time 
Traveller's Handbook of 1001 Tense Formations. It will tell you for 
instance how to describe something that was about to happen to you 
in the past before you avoided it by time ʹ jumping forward two days 
in order to avoid it. The event will be described differently according 
to whether you are talking about it from the standpoint of your own 
natural time, from a time in the further future, or a time in the further 
past and is further complicated by the possibility of conducting 
conversations whilst you are actually travelling from one time to 
another with the intention of becoming your own father or mother. 
Most readers get as far as the Future Semi`Conditionally Modified 
Subinverted Plagal Past Subjunctive Intentional before giving up: and 
in fact in later editions of the book all the pages beyond this point 
have been left blank to save on printing costs. 
The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy skips lightly over this tangle of 
academic abstraction, pausing only to note that the term "Future 
Perfect" has been abandoned since it was discovered not to be. 
To resume: 
The Restaurant at the End of the Universe is one of the most 
extraordinary ventures in the entire history of catering. 
It is built on the fragmented remains of an eventually ruined planet 
which is (wioll haven be) enclosed in a vast time bubble and projected 
forward in time to the precise moment of the End of the Universe. 
This is, many would say, impossible. 
In it, guests take (willan on`take) their places at table and eat 
(willan on`eat) sumptuous meals whilst watching (willing watchen) 
the whole of creation explode around them. 
This is, many would say, equally impossible. 
You can arrive (mayan arivan on`when) for any sitting you like 
without prior (late fore`when) reservation because you can book 
retrospectively, as it were when you return to your own time. (you 
can have on`book haventa forewhen presooning returningwenta 
retrohome.) 
This is, many would now insist, absolutely impossible. 
At the Restaurant you can meet and dine with (mayan meetan con 
with dinan on when) a fascinating cross`section of the entire 
population of space and time. 
This, it can be explained patiently, is also impossible. 
You can visit it as many times as you like (mayan on`visit re`
onvisiting... and so on`for further tense`corrections consult Dr. 
Streetmentioner's book) and be sure of never meeting yourself, 
because of the embarrassment this usually causes. 
This, even if the rest were true, which it isn't, is patently impossible, 
say the doubters. 
All you have to do is deposit one penny in a savings account in your 
own era, and when you arrive at the End of Time the operation of 
compound interest means that the fabulous cost of your meal has 
been paid for. 
This, many claim, is not merely impossible but clearly insane, which 
is why the advertising executives of the star system of Bastablon 
came up with this slogan: "If you've done six impossible things this 
morning, why not round it off with breakfast at Milliways, the 
Restaurant at the End of the Universe?" 
Chapter 16
At the bar, Zaphod was rapidly becoming as tired as a newt. His 
heads knocked together and his smiles were coming out of synch. He 
was miserably happy. 
"Zaphod," said Ford, "whilst you're still capable of speech, would 
you care to tell me what the photon happened? Where have you 
been? Where have we been? Small matter, but I'd like it cleared up." 
Zaphod's left head sobered up, leaving his right to sink further into 
the obscurity of drink. 
"Yeah," he said, "I've been around. They want me to find the man 
who rules the Universe, but I don't care to meet him. I believe the 
man can't cook." 
His left head watched his right head saying this and then nodded. 
"True," it said, "have another drink." 
Ford had another Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster, the drink which has 
been described as the alcoholic equivalent of a mugging`expensive 
and bad for the head. Whatever had happened, Ford decided, he 
didn't really care too much. 
"Listen Ford," said Zaphod, "everything's cool and froody." 
"You mean everything's under control." 
"No," said Zaphod, "I do not mean everything's under control. That 
would not be cool and froody. If you want to know what happened 
let's just say I had the whole situation in my pocket. OK?" 
Ford shrugged. 
Zaphod giggled into his drink. It frothed up over the side of the 
glass and started to eat its way into the marble bar top. 
A wild`skinned sky`gypsy approached them and played electric 
violin at them until Zaphod gave him a lot of money and he agreed to 
go away again. 
The gypsy approached Arthur and Trillian sitting in another part of 
the bar. 
"I don't know what this place is," said Arthur, "but I think it gives 
me the creeps." 
"Have another drink," said Trillian, "Enjoy yourself." 
"Which?" said Arthur, "the two are mutually exclusive." 
"Poor Arthur, you're not really cut out for this life are you?" 
"You call this life?" 
"You're beginning to sound like Marvin." 
"Marvin's the clearest thinker I know. How do you think we make 
this violinist go away?" 
The waiter approached. 
"Your table is ready," he said. 
Seen from the outside, which it never is, the Restaurant resembles 
a giant glittering starfish beached on a forgotten rock. Each of its arms 
houses the bars, the kitchens, the forcefield generators which protect 
the entire structure and the decayed planet on which it sits, and the 
Time Turbines which slowly rock the whole affair backwards and 
forwards across the crucial moment. 
In the centre sits the gigantic golden dome, almost a complete 
globe, and it was into this area that Zaphod, Ford, Arthur and Trillian 
now passed. 
At least five tons of glitter alone had gone into it before them, and 
covered every available surface. The other surfaces were not available 
because they were already encrusted with jewels, precious sea shells 
from Santraginus, gold leaf, mosaic tiles, lizard skins and a million 
unidentifiable embellishments and decorations. Glass glittered, silver 
shone, gold gleamed, Arthur Dent goggled. 
"Wowee," said Zaphod, "Zappo." 
"Incredible " breathed Arthur, "the people...  The things... " 
"The things," said Ford Prefect quietly, "are also people." 
"The people..." resumed Arthur, "the... other people..." 
"The lights... " said Trillian. 
"The tables..." said Arthur. 
"The clothes... " said Trillian. 
The waiter thought they sounded like a couple of bailiffs. 
"The End of the Universe is very popular," said Zaphod threading 
his way unsteadily through the throng of tables, some made of 
marble, some of rich ultra`mahagony, some even of platinum, and at 
each a party of exotic creatures chatting amongst themselves and 
studying menus. 
"People like to dress up for it," continued Zaphod, "Gives it a sense 
of occasion." 
The tables were fanned out in a large circle around a central stage 
area where a small band were playing light music, at least a thousand 
tables was Arthur's guess, and interspersed amongst them were 
swaying palms, hissing fountains, grotesque statuary, in short all the 
paraphernalia common to all Restaurants where little expense has 
been spared to give the impression that no expense has been spared. 
Arthur glanced around, half expecting to see someone making an 
American Express commercial. 
Zaphod lurched into Ford, who lurched back into Zaphod. 
"Wowee," said Zaphod. 
"Zappo," said Ford. 
"My great granddaddy must have really screwed up the computer's 
works, you know," said Zaphod, "I told it to take us to the nearest 
place to eat and it sends us to the End of the Universe. Remind me to 
be nice to it one day." 
He paused. 
"Hey, everybody's here you know. Everybody who was anybody." 
"Was?" said Arthur. 
"At the End of the Universe you have to use the past tense a lot," 
said Zaphod, "'cos everything's been done you know. Hi, guys," he 
called out to a nearby party of giant iguana lifeforms, "How did you 
do?" 
"Is that Zaphod Beeblebrox?" asked one iguana of another iguana. 
"I think so," replied the second iguana. 
"Well doesn't that just take the biscuit," said the first iguana. 
"Funny old thing, life," said the second iguana. 
"It's what you make of it," said the first and they lapsed back into 
silence. They were waiting for the greatest show in the Universe. 
"Hey, Zaphod," said Ford, grabbing for his arm and, on account of 
the third Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster, missing. He pointed a swaying 
finger. 
"There's an old mate of mine," he said, "Hotblack Desiato  See the 
man at the platinum table with the platinum suit on?" 
Zaphod tried to follow Ford's finger with his eyes but it made him 
feel dizzy. Finally he saw. 
"Oh yeah," he said, then recognition came a moment later. "Hey," 
he said, "did that guy ever make it megabig  Wow, bigger than the 
biggest thing ever. Other than me." 
"Who's he supposed to be?" asked Trillian. 
"Hotblack Desiato?" said Zaphod in astonishment, "you don't know? 
You never heard of Disaster Area?" 
"No," said Trillian, who hadn't. 
"The biggest," said Ford, "loudest..." 
"Richest..." suggested Zaphod. 
"... rock band in the history of..." he searched for the word. 
"... history itself," said Zaphod. 
"No," said Trillian. 
"Zowee," said Zaphod, "here we are at the End of the Universe and 
you haven't even lived yet. Did you miss out." 
He led her off to where the waiter had been waiting all this time at 
the table. Arthur followed them feeling very lost and alone. 
Ford waded off through the throng to renew an old acquaintance. 
"Hey, er, Hotblack," he called out, "how you doing? Great to see 
you big boy, how's the noise? You're looking great, really very, very 
fat and unwell. Amazing." He slapped the man on the back and was 
mildly surprised that it seemed to elict no response. The Pan Galactic 
Gargle Blasters swirling round inside him told him to plunge on 
regardless. 
"Remember the old days?" he said, "We used to hang out, right? 
The Bistro Illegal, remember? Slim's Throat Emporium? The Evildrome 
Boozarama, great days eh?" 
Hotblack Desiato offered no opinion as to whether they were great 
days or not. Ford was not perturbed. 
"And when we were hungry we'd pose as public health inspectors, 
you remember that? And go around confiscating meals and drinks 
right? Till we got food poisoning. Oh, and then there were the long 
nights of talking and drinking in those smelly rooms above the Cafe 
Lou in Gretchen Town, New Betel, and you were always in the next 
room trying to write songs on your ajuitar and we all hated them. And 
you said you didn't care, and we said we did because we hated them 
so much." Ford's eyes were beginning to mist over. 
"And you said you didn't want to be a star," he continued, 
wallowing in nostalgia, "because you despised the star system. And 
we said, Hadra and Sulijoo and me, that we didn't think you had the 
option. And what do you do now? You buy star systems " 
He turned and solicited the attention of those at nearby tables. 
"Here," he said, "is a man who buys star systems " 
Hotblack Desiato made no attempt either to confirm or deny this 
fact, and the attention of the temporary audience waned rapidly. 
"I think someone's drunk," muttered a purple bush`like being into 
his wine glass. 
Ford staggered slightly, and sat down heavily on the chair facing 
Hotblack Desiato. 
"What's that number you do?" he said, unwisely grabbing at a 
bottle for support and tipping it over ʹ into a nearby glass as it 
happened. Not to waste a happy accident, he drained the glass. 
"That really huge number," he continued, "how does it go? 'Bwarm  
Bwarm  Baderr  ' something, and in the stage act you do it ends up 
with this ship crashing right into the sun, and you actually do it " 
Ford crashed his fist into his other hand to illustrate this feat 
graphically. He knocked the bottle over again. 
"Ship  Sun  Wham bang " he cried. "I mean forget lasers and stuff, 
you guys are into solar flares and real sunburn  Oh, and terrible 
songs." 
His eyes followed the stream of liquid glugging out of the bottle on 
to the table. Something ought to be done about it, he thought. 
"Hey, you want a drink?" he said. It began to sink into his 
squelching mind that something was missing from this reunion, and 
that the missing something was in some way connected with the fact 
that the fat man sitting opposite him in the platinum suit and the 
silvery trilby had not yet said "Hi, Ford" or "Great to see you after all 
this time," or in fact anything at all. More to the point he had not yet 
even moved. 
"Hotblack?" said Ford. 
A large meaty hand landed on his shoulder from behind and 
pushed him aside. He slid gracelessly off his seat and peered upwards 
to see if he could spot the owner of this discourteous hand. The 
owner was not hard to spot, on account of his being something of the 
order of seven feet tall and not slightly built with it. In fact he was 
built the way one builds leather sofas, shiny, lumpy and with lots of 
solid stuffing. The suit into which the man's body had been stuffed 
looked as if it's only purpose in life was to demonstrate how difficult it 
was to get this sort of body into a suit. The face had the texture of an 
orange and the colour of an apple, but there the resemblance to 
anything sweet ended. 
"Kid..." said a voice which emerged from the man's mouth as if it 
had been having a really rough time down in his chest. 
"Er, yeah?" said Ford conversationally. He staggered back to his 
feet again and was disappointed that the top of his head didn't come 
further up the man's body. 
"Beat it," said the man. 
"Oh yeah?" said Ford, wondering how wise he was being, "and who 
are you?" 
The man considered this for a moment. He wasn't used to being 
asked this sort of question. Nevertheless, after a while he came up 
with an answer. 
"I'm the guy who's telling you to beat it," he said, "before you get it 
beaten for you." 
"Now listen," said Ford nervously ʹ he wished his head would stop 
spinning, settle down and get to grips with the situation ʹ "Now 
listen," he continued, "I am one of Hotblack's oldest friends and..." 
He glanced at Hotblack Desiato, who still hadn't moved so much as 
an eyelash. 
"... and..." said Ford again, wondering what would be a good word 
to say after "and". 
The large man came up with a whole sentence to go after "and". 
He said it. 
"And I am Mr. Desiato's bodyguard," it went, "and I am responsible 
for his body, and I am not responsible for yours, so take it away 
before it gets damaged." 
"Now wait a minute," said Ford. 
"No minutes " boomed the bodyguard, "no waiting  Mr. Desiato 
speaks to no one " 
"Well perhaps you'd let him say what he thinks about the matter 
himself," said Ford. 
"He speaks to no one " bellowed the bodyguard. 
Ford glanced anxiously at Hotblack again and was forced to admit 
to himself that the bodyguard seemed to have the facts on his side. 
There was still not the slightest sign of movement, let alone keen 
interest in Ford's welfare. 
"Why?" said Ford, "What's the matter with him?" 
The bodyguard told him. 
Chapter 17
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy notes that Disaster Area, a 
plutonium rock band from the Gagrakacka Mind Zones, are generally 
held to be not only the loudest rock band in the Galaxy, but in fact the 
loudest noise of any kind at all. Regular concert goers judge that the 
best sound balance is usually to be heard from within large concrete 
bunkers some thirty`seven miles from the stage, whilst the musicians 
themselves play their instruments by remote control from within a 
heavily insulated spaceship which stays in orbit around the planet ʹ or 
more frequently around a completely different planet. 
Their songs are on the whole very simple and mostly follow the 
familiar theme of boy`being meets girl`being beneath a silvery moon, 
which then explodes for no adequately explored reason. 
Many worlds have now banned their act altogether, sometimes for 
artistic reasons, but most commonly because the band's public 
address system contravenes local strategic arms limitations treaties. 
This has not, however, stopped their earnings from pushing back 
the boundaries of pure hypermathematics, and their chief research 
accountant has recently been appointed Professor of 
Neomathematics at the University of Maximegalon, in recognition of 
both his General and his Special Theories of Disaster Area Tax Returns, 
in which he proves that the whole fabric of the space`time continuum 
is not merely curved, it is in fact totally bent. 
Ford staggered back to the table where Zaphod, Arthur and Trillian 
were sitting waiting for the fun to begin. 
"Gotta have some food," said Ford. 
"Hi, Ford," said Zaphod, "you speak to the big noise boy?" 
Ford waggled his head noncommittally. 
"Hotblack? I sort of spoke to him, yeah." 
"What'd he say?" 
"Well, not a lot really. He's... er..." 
"Yeah?" 
"He's spending a year dead for tax reasons. I've got to sit down." 
He sat down. 
The waiter approached. 
"Would you like to see the menu?" he said, "or would you like to 
meet the Dish of the Day?" 
"Huh?" said Ford. 
"Huh?" said Arthur. 
"Huh?" said Trillian. 
"That's cool," said Zaphod, "we'll meet the meat." 
In a small room in one of the arms of the Restaurant complex a tall, 
thin, gangling figure pulled aside a curtain and oblivion looked him in 
the face. 
It was not a pretty face, perhaps because oblivion had looked him 
in it so many times. It was too long for a start, the eyes too sunken 
and too hooded, the cheeks too hollow, his lips were too thin and too 
long, and when they parted his teeth looked too much like a recently 
polished bay window. The hands that held the curtain were long and 
thin too: they were also cold. They lay lightly along the folds of the 
curtain and gave the impression that if he didn't watch them like a 
hawk they would crawl away of their own accord and do something 
unspeakable in a corner. 
He let the curtain drop and the terrible light that had played on his 
features went off to play somewhere more healthy. He prowled 
around his small chamber like a mantis contemplating an evening's 
preying, finally settling on a rickety chair by a trestle table, where he 
leafed through a few sheets of jokes. 
A bell rang. 
He pushed the thin sheaf of papers aside and stood up. His hands 
brushed limply over some of the one million rainbow`coloured 
sequins with which his jacket was festooned, and he was gone 
through the door. 
In the Restaurant the lights dimmed, the band quickened its pace, a 
single spotlight stabbed down into the darkness of the stairway that 
led up to the centre of the stage. 
Up the stairs bounded a tall brilliantly coloured figure. He burst on 
to the stage, tripped lightly up to the microphone, removed it from its 
stand with one swoop of his long thin hand and stood for a moment 
bowing left and right to the audience acknowledging their applause 
and displaying to them his bay window. He waved to his particular 
friends in the audience even though there weren't any there, and 
waited for the applause to die down. 
He held up his hand and smiled a smile that stretched not merely 
from ear to ear, but seemed to extend some way beyond the mere 
confines of his face. 
"Thank you ladies and gentlemen " he cried, "thank you very much. 
Thank you so much." 
He eyed them with a twinkling eye. 
"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "The Universe as we know it has 
now been in existence for over one hundred and seventy thousand 
million billion years and will be ending in a little over half an hour. So, 
welcome one and all to Milliways, the Restaurant at the End of the 
Universe " 
With a gesture he deftly conjured another round of spontaneous 
applause. With another gesture he cut it. 
"I am your host for tonight," he said, "my name is Max 
Quordlepleen..." (Everybody knew this, his act was famous 
throughout the known Galaxy, but he said it for the fresh applause it 
generated, which he acknowledged with a disclaiming smile and 
wave.) "... and I've just come straight from the very very other end of 
time, where I've been hosting a show at the Big Bang Burger Bar ʹ
where I can tell you we had a very exciting evening ladies and 
gentlemen ʹ and I will be with you right through this historic occasion, 
the End of History itself " 
Another burst of applause died away quickly as the lights dimmed 
down further. On every table candles ignited themselves 
spontaneously, eliciting a slight gasp from all the diners and 
wreathing them in a thousand tiny flickering lights and a million 
intimate shadows. A tremor of excitement thrilled through the 
darkened Restaurant as the vast golden dome above them began very 
very slowly to dim, to darken, to fade. 
Max's voice was hushed as he continued. 
"So, ladies and gentlemen," he breathed, "the candles are lit, the 
band plays softly, and as the force`shielded dome above us fades into 
transparency, revealing a dark and sullen sky hung heavy with the 
ancient light of livid swollen stars, I can see we're all in for a fabulous 
evening's apocalypse " 
Even the soft tootling of the band faded away as stunned shock 
descended on all those who had not seen this sight before. 
A monstrous, grisly light poured in on them, 
ʹ a hideous light, 
ʹ a boiling, pestilential light, 
ʹ a light that would have disfigured hell. 
The Universe was coming to an end. 
For a few interminable seconds the Restaurant span silently 
through the raging void. Then Max spoke again. 
"For those of you who ever hoped to see the light at the end of the 
tunnel," he said, "this is it." 
The band struck up again. 
"Thank you, ladies and gentlemen," cried Max, "I'll be back with 
you again in just a moment, and meanwhile I leave you in the very 
capable hands of Mr. Reg Nullify and his cataclysmic Combo. Big hand 
please ladies and gentlemen for Reg and the boys " 
The baleful turmoil of the skies continued. 
Hesitantly the audience began to clap and after a moment or so 
normal conversation resumed. Max began his round of the tables, 
swapping jokes, shouting with laughter, earning his living. 
A large dairy animal approached Zaphod Beeblebrox's table, a large 
fat meaty quadruped of the bovine type with large watery eyes, small 
horns and what might almost have been an ingratiating smile on its 
lips. 
"Good evening," it lowed and sat back heavily on its haunches, "I 
am the main Dish of the Day. May I interest you in parts of my body?" 
It harrumphed and gurgled a bit, wriggled its hind quarters into a 
more comfortable position and gazed peacefully at them. 
Its gaze was met by looks of startled bewilderment from Arthur 
and Trillian, a resigned shrug from Ford Prefect and naked hunger 
from Zaphod Beeblebrox. 
"Something off the shoulder perhaps?" suggested the animal, 
"Braised in a white wine sauce?" 
"Er, your shoulder?" said Arthur in a horrified whisper. 
"But naturally my shoulder, sir," mooed the animal contentedly, 
"nobody else's is mine to offer." 
Zaphod leapt to his feet and started prodding and feeling the 
animal's shoulder appreciatively. 
"Or the rump is very good," murmured the animal. "I've been 
exercising it and eating plenty of grain, so there's a lot of good meat 
there." It gave a mellow grunt, gurgled again and started to chew the 
cud. It swallowed the cud again. 
"Or a casserole of me perhaps?" it added. 
"You mean this animal actually wants us to eat it?" whispered 
Trillian to Ford. 
"Me?" said Ford, with a glazed look in his eyes, "I don't mean 
anything." 
"That's absolutely horrible," exclaimed Arthur, "the most revolting 
thing I've ever heard." 
"What's the problem Earthman?" said Zaphod, now transferring his 
attention to the animal's enormous rump. 
"I just don't want to eat an animal that's standing here inviting me 
to," said Arthur, "it's heartless." 
"Better than eating an animal that doesn't want to be eaten," said 
Zaphod. 
"That's not the point," Arthur protested. Then he thought about it 
for a moment. "Alright," he said, "maybe it is the point. I don't care, 
I'm not going to think about it now. I'll just... er..." 
The Universe raged about him in its death throes. 
"I think I'll just have a green salad," he muttered. 
"May I urge you to consider my liver?" asked the animal, "it must 
be very rich and tender by now, I've been force`feeding myself for 
months." 
"A green salad," said Arthur emphatically. 
"A green salad?" said the animal, rolling his eyes disapprovingly at 
Arthur. 
"Are you going to tell me," said Arthur, "that I shouldn't have green 
salad?" 
"Well," said the animal, "I know many vegetables that are very 
clear on that point. Which is why it was eventually decided to cut 
through the whole tangled problem and breed an animal that actually 
wanted to be eaten and was capable of saying so clearly and distinctly. 
And here I am." 
It managed a very slight bow. 
"Glass of water please," said Arthur. 
"Look," said Zaphod, "we want to eat, we don't want to make a 
meal of the issues. Four rare steaks please, and hurry. We haven't 
eaten in five hundred and seventy`six thousand million years." 
The animal staggered to its feet. It gave a mellow gurgle. 
"A very wise choice, sir, if I may say so. Very good," it said, "I'll just 
nip off and shoot myself." 
He turned and gave a friendly wink to Arthur. 
"Don't worry, sir," he said, "I'll be very humane." 
It waddled unhurriedly off into the kitchen. 
A matter of minutes later the waiter arrived with four huge 
steaming steaks. Zaphod and Ford wolfed straight into them without 
a second's hesitation. Trillian paused, then shrugged and started into 
hers. 
Arthur stared at his feeling slightly ill. 
"Hey, Earthman," said Zaphod with a malicious grin on the face 
that wasn't stuffing itself, "what's eating you?" 
And the band played on. 
All around the Restaurant people and things relaxed and chatted. 
The air was filled with talk of this and that, and with the mingled 
scents of exotic plants, extravagant foods and insidious wines. For an 
infinite number of miles in every direction the universal cataclysm 
was gathering to a stupefying climax. Glancing at his watch, Max 
returned to the stage with a flourish. 
"And now, ladies and gentlemen," he beamed, "is everyone having 
one last wonderful time?" 
"Yes," called out the sort of people who call out "yes" when 
comedians ask them if they're having a wonderful time. 
"That's wonderful," enthused Max, "absolutely wonderful. And as 
the photon storms gather in swirling crowds around us, preparing to 
tear apart the last of the red hot suns, I know you're all going to settle 
back and enjoy with me what I know we will find all an immensely 
exciting and terminal experience." 
He paused. He caught the audience with a glittering eye. 
"Believe me, ladies and gentlemen," he said, "there's nothing 
penultimate about this one." 
He paused again. Tonight his timing was immaculate. Time after 
time he had done this show, night after night. Not that the word night 
had any meaning here at the extremity of time. All there was the 
endless repetition of the final moment, as the Restaurant rocked 
slowly forward over the brink of time's furthest edge ʹ and back again. 
This "night" was good though, the audience was writhing in the palm 
of his sickly hand. His voice dropped. They had to strain to hear him. 
"This," he said, "really is the absolute end, the final chilling 
desolation, in which the whole majestic sweep of creation becomes 
extinct. This ladies and gentlemen is the proverbial 'it'." 
He dropped his voice still lower. In the stillness, a fly would not 
have dared clear its throat. 
"After this," he said, "there is nothing. Void. Emptiness. Oblivion. 
Absolute nothing..." 
His eyes glittered again ʹ or did they twinkle?" 
"Nothing... except of course for the sweet trolley, and a fine 
selection of Aldebaran liqueurs " 
The band gave him a musical sting. He wished they wouldn't, he 
didn't need it, not an artist of his calibre. He could play the audience 
like his own musical instrument. They were laughing with relief. He 
followed on. 
"And for once," he cried cheerily, "you don't need to worry about 
having a hangover in the morning ʹ because there won't be any more 
mornings " 
He beamed at his happy, laughing audience. He glanced up at the 
sky, going through the same dead routine every night, but his glance 
was only for a fraction of a second. He trusted it to do its job, as one 
professional trusts another. 
"And now," he said, strutting about the stage, "at the risk of 
putting a damper on the wonderful sense of doom and futility here 
this evening, I would like to welcome a few parties." 
He pulled a card from his pocket. 
"Do we have..." he put up a hand to hold back the cheers, "Do we 
have a party here from the Zansellquasure Flamarion Bridge Club 
from beyond the Vortvoid of Qvarne? Are they here?" 
A rousing cheer came from the back, but he pretended not to hear. 
He peered around trying to find them. 
"Are they here?" he asked again, to elict a louder cheer. 
He got it, as he always did. 
"Ah, there they are. Well, last bids lads ʹ and no cheating, 
remember this is a very solemn moment." 
He lapped up the laughter. 
"And do we also have, do we have... a party of minor deities from 
the Halls of Asgard?" 
Away to his right came a rumble of thunder. Lightning arced across 
the stage. A small group of hairy men with helmets sat looking very 
pleased with themselves, and raised their glasses to him. 
Hasbeens, he thought to himself. 
"Careful with that hammer, sir," he said. 
They did their trick with the lightning again. Max gave them a very 
thin lipped smile. 
"And thirdly," he said, "thirdly a party of Young Conservatives from 
Sirius B, are they here?" 
A party of smartly dressed young dogs stopped throwing rolls at 
each other and started throwing rolls at the stage. They yapped and 
barked unintelligibly. 
"Yes," said Max, "well this is all your fault, you realize that?" 
"And finally," said Max, quieting the audience down and putting on 
his solemn face, "finally I believe we have with us here tonight, a 
party of believers, very devout believers, from the Church of the 
Second Coming of the Great Prophet Zarquon." 
There were about twenty of them, sitting right out on the edge of 
the floor, ascetically dressed, sipping mineral water nervously, and 
staying apart from the festivities. They blinked resentfully as the 
spotlight was turned on them. 
"There they are," said Max, "sitting there, patiently. He said he'd 
come again, and he's kept you waiting a long time, so let's hope he's 
hurrying fellas, because he's only got eight minutes left " 
The party of Zarquon's followers sat rigid, refusing to be buffeted 
by the waves of uncharitable laughter which swept over them. 
Max restrained his audience. 
"No, but seriously though folks, seriously though, no offence meant. 
No, I know we shouldn't make fun of deeply held beliefs, so I think a 
big hand please for the Great Prophet Zarquon..." 
The audience clapped respectfully. 
"... wherever he's got to " 
He blew a kiss to the stony`faced party and returned to the centre 
of the stage. 
He grabbed a tall stool and sat on it. 
"It's marvellous though," he rattled on, "to see so many of you here 
tonight ʹ no isn't it though? Yes, absolutely marvellous. Because I 
know that so many of you come here time and time again, which I 
think is really wonderful, to come and watch this final end of 
everything, and then return home to your own eras... and raise 
families, strive for new and better societies, fight terrible wars for 
what you know to be right... it really gives one hope for the future of 
all lifekind. Except of course," he waved at the blitzing turmoil above 
and around them, "that we know it hasn't got one..." 
Arthur turned to Ford ʹ he hadn't quite got this place worked out 
in his mind. 
"Look, surely," he said, "if the Universe is about to end... don't we 
go with it?" 
Ford gave him a three`Pan`Galactic`Gargle`Blaster look, in other 
words a rather unsteady one. 
"No," he said, "look," he said, "as soon as you come into this dive 
you get held in this sort of amazing force`shielded temporal warp 
thing. I think." 
"Oh," said Arthur. He turned his attention back to a bowl of soup 
he'd managed to get from the waiter to replace his steak. 
"Look," said Ford, "I'll show you." 
He grabbed at a napkin off the table and fumbled hopelessly with it. 
"Look," he said again, "imagine this napkin, right, as the temporal 
Universe, right? And this spoon as a transductional mode in the 
matter curve..." 
It took him a while to say this last part, and Arthur hated to 
interrupt him. 
"That's the spoon I was eating with," he said. 
"Alright," said Ford, "imagine this spoon..." he found a small 
wooden spoon on a tray of relishes, "this spoon..." but found it rather 
tricky to pick up, "no, better still this fork..." 
"Hey would you let go of my fork?" snapped Zaphod. 
"Alright," said Ford, "alright, alright. Why don't we say... why don't 
we say that this wine glass is the temporal Universe..." 
"What, the one you've just knocked on the floor?" 
"Did I do that?" 
"Yes." 
"Alright," said Ford, "forget that. I mean... I mean, look, do you 
know ʹ do you know how the Universe actually began for a kick off?" 
"Probably not," said Arthur, who wished he'd never embarked on 
any of this. 
"Alright," said Ford, "imagine this. Right. You get this bath. Right. A 
large round bath. And it's made of ebony." 
"Where from?" said Arthur, "Harrods was destroyed by the 
Vogons." 
"Doesn't matter." 
"So you keep saying." 
"Listen." 
"Alright." 
"You get this bath, see? Imagine you've got this bath. And it's 
ebony. And it's conical." 
"Conical?" said Arthur, "What sort of..." 
"Shhh " said Ford. "It's conical. So what you do is, you see, you fill it 
with fine white sand, alright? Or sugar. Fine white sand, and/or sugar. 
Anything. Doesn't matter. Sugar's fine. And when it's full, you pull the 
plug out... are you listening?" 
"I'm listening." 
"You pull the plug out, and it all just twirls away, twirls away you 
see, out of the plughole." 
"I see." 
"You don't see. You don't see at all. I haven't got to the clever bit 
yet. You want to hear the clever bit?" 
"Tell me the clever bit." 
"I'll tell you the clever bit." 
Ford thought for a moment, trying to remember what the clever bit 
was. 
"The clever bit," he said, "is this. You film it happening." 
"Clever." 
"That's not the clever bit. This is the clever bit, I remember now 
that this is the clever bit. The clever bit is that you then thread the 
film in the projector... backwards " 
"Backwards?" 
"Yes. Threading it backwards is definitely the clever bit. So then, 
you just sit and watch it, and everything just appears to spiral 
upwards out of the plughole and fill the bath. See?" 
"And that's how the Universe began is it?" said Arthur. 
"No," said Ford, "but it's a marvellous way to relax." 
He reached for his wine glass. 
"Where's my wine glass?" he said. 
"It's on the floor." 
"Ah." 
Tipping back his chair to look for it, Ford collided with the small 
green waiter who was approaching the table carrying a portable 
telephone. 
Ford excused himself to the waiter explaining that it was because 
he was extremely drunk. 
The waiter said that that was quite alright and that he perfectly 
understood. 
Ford thanked the waiter for his kind indulgence, attempted to tug 
his forelock, missed by six inches and slid under the table. 
"Mr. Zaphod Beeblebrox?" inquired the waiter. 
"Er, yeah?" said Zaphod, glancing up from his third steak. 
"There is a phone call for you." 
"Hey, what?" 
"A phone call, sir." 
"For me? Here? Hey, but who knows where I am?" 
One of his minds raced. The other dawdled lovingly over the food it 
was still shovelling in. 
"Excuse me if I carry on, won't you?" said his eating head and 
carried on. 
There were now so many people after him he'd lost count. He 
shouldn't have made such a conspicuous entrance. Hell, why not 
though, he thought. How do you know you're having fun if there's no 
one watching you have it? 
"Maybe someone here tipped off the Galactic Police," said Trillian. 
"Everyone saw you come in." 
"You mean they want to arrest me over the phone?" said Zaphod, 
"Could be. I'm a pretty dangerous dude when I'm concerned." 
"Yeah," said a voice from under the table, "you go to pieces so fast 
people get hit by the shrapnel." 
"Hey, what is this, Judgment Day?" snapped Zaphod. 
"Do we get to see that as well?" asked Arthur nervously. 
"I'm in no hurry," muttered Zaphod, "OK, so who's the cat on the 
phone?" He kicked Ford. "Hey get up there, kid," he said to him, "I 
may need you." 
"I am not," said the waiter, "personally acquainted with the metal 
gentlemen in question, sir..." 
"Metal?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"Did you say metal?" 
"Yes, sir. I said that I am not personally acquainted with the metal 
gentleman in question..." 
"OK, carry on." 
"But I am informed that he has been awaiting your return for a 
considerable number of millennia. It seems you left here somewhat 
precipitately." 
"Left here?" said Zaphod, "are you being strange? We only just 
arrived here." 
"Indeed, sir," persisted the waiter doggedly, "but before you 
arrived here, sir, I understand that you left here." 
Zaphod tried this in one brain, then in the other. 
"You're saying," he said, "that before we arrived here, we left 
here?" 
This is going to be a long night, thought the waiter. 
"Precisely, sir," he said. 
"Put your analyst on danger money, baby," advised Zaphod. 
"No, wait a minute," said Ford, emerging above table level again, 
"where exactly is here?" 
"To be absolutely exact sir, it is Frogstar World B." 
"But we just left there," protested Zaphod, "we left there and came 
to the Restaurant at the End of the Universe." 
"Yes, sir," said the waiter, feeling that he was now into the home 
stretch and running well, "the one was constructed on the ruins of the 
other." 
"Oh," said Arthur brightly, "you mean we've travelled in time but 
not in space." 
"Listen you semi`evolved simian," cut in Zaphod, "go climb a tree 
will you?" 
Arthur bristled. 
"Go bang your heads together four`eyes," he advised Zaphod. 
"No, no," the waiter said to Zaphod, "your monkey has got it right, 
sir." 
Arthur stuttered in fury and said nothing apposite, or indeed 
coherent. 
"You jumped forward... I believe five hundred and seventy`six 
thousand million years whilst staying in exactly the same place," 
explained the waiter. He smiled. He had a wonderful feeling that he 
had finally won through against what had seemed to be insuperable 
odds. 
"That's it " said Zaphod, "I got it. I told the computer to send us to 
the nearest place to eat, that's exactly what it did. Give or take five 
hundred and seventy`six thousand million years, we never moved. 
Neat." 
They all agreed this was very neat. 
"But who," said Zaphod, "is the cat on the phone?" 
"Whatever happened to Marvin?" said Trillian. 
Zaphod clapped his hands to his heads. 
"The Paranoid Android  I left him moping about on Frogstar B." 
"When was this?" 
"Well, er, five hundred and seventy`six thousand million years ago I 
suppose," said Zaphod, "Hey, er, hand me the rap`rod, Plate Captain." 
The little waiter's eyebrows wandered about his forehead in 
confusion. 
"I beg your pardon, sir?" he said. 
"The phone, waiter," said Zaphod, grabbing it off him. "Shee, you 
guys are so unhip it's a wonder your bums don't fall off." 
"Indeed, sir." 
"Hey, Marvin, is that you?" said Zaphod into the phone, "How you 
doing, kid?" 
There was a long pause before a thin low voice came up the line. 
"I think you ought to know I'm feeling very depressed," it said. 
Zaphod cupped his hands over the phone. 
"It's Marvin," he said. 
"Hey, Marvin," he said into the phone again, "we're having a great 
time. Food, wine, a little personal abuse and the Universe going foom. 
Where can we find you?" 
Again the pause. 
"You don't have to pretend to be interested in me you know," said 
Marvin at last, "I know perfectly well I'm only a menial robot." 
"OK, OK," said Zaphod, "but where are you?" 
"'Reverse primary thrust, Marvin,' that's what they say to me, 
'open airlock number three, Marvin. Marvin, can you pick up that 
piece of paper?' Can I pick up that piece of paper  Here I am, brain the 
size of a planet and they ask me to..." 
"Yeah, yeah," sympathized Zaphod hardly at all. 
"But I'm quite used to being humiliated," droned Marvin, "I can 
even go and stick my head in a bucket of water if you like. Would you 
like me to go and stick my head in a bucket of water? I've got one 
ready. Wait a minute." 
"Er, hey, Marvin..." interrupted Zaphod, but it was too late. Sad 
little clunks and gurgles came up the line. 
"What's he saying?" asked Trillian. 
"Nothing," said Zaphod, "he just phoned up to wash his head at 
us." 
"There," said Marvin, coming back on the line and bubbling a bit, "I 
hope that gave satisfaction..." 
"Yeah, yeah," said Zaphod, "now will you please tell us where you 
are?" 
"I'm in the car park," said Marvin. 
"The car park?" said Zaphod, "what are you doing there?" 
"Parking cars, what else does one do in a car park?" 
"OK, hang in there, we'll be right down." 
In one movement Zaphod leapt to his feet, threw down the phone 
and wrote "Hotblack Desiato" on the bill. 
"Come on guys," he said, "Marvin's in the car park. Let's get on 
down." 
"What's he doing in the car park?" asked Arthur. 
"Parking cars, what else? Dum dum." 
"But what about the End of the Universe? We'll miss the big 
moment." 
"I've seen it. It's rubbish," said Zaphod, "nothing but a gnab gib." 
"A what?" 
"Opposite of a big bang. Come on, let's get zappy." 
Few of the other diners paid them any attention as they weaved 
their way through the Restaurant to the exit. Their eyes were riveted 
on the horror of the skies. 
"An interesting effect to watch for," Max was telling them, "is in 
the upper left`hand quadrant of the sky, where if you look very 
carefully you can see the star system Hastromil boiling away into the 
ultra`violet. Anyone here from Hastromil?" 
There were one or two slightly hesitant cheers from somewhere at 
the back. 
"Well," said Max beaming cheerfully at them, "it's too late to worry 
about whether you left the gas on now." 
Chapter 18
The main reception foyer was almost empty but Ford nevertheless 
weaved his way through it. 
Zaphod grasped him firmly by the arm and manoeuvred him into a 
cubicle standing to one side of the entrance hall. 
"What are you doing to him?" asked Arthur. 
"Sobering him up," said Zaphod and pushed a coin into a slot. 
Lights flashed, gases swirled. 
"Hi," said Ford stepping out a moment later, "where are we going?" 
"Down to the car park, come on." 
"What about the personnel Time Teleports?" said Ford, "Get us 
straight back to the Heart of Gold." 
"Yeah, but I've cooled on that ship. Zarniwoop can have it. I don't 
want to play his games. Let's see what we can find." 
A Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Happy Vertical People Transporter 
took them down deep into the substrata beneath the Restaurant. 
They were glad to see it had been vandalized and didn't try to make 
them happy as well as take them down. 
At the bottom of the shaft the lift doors opened and a blast of cold 
stale air hit them. 
The first thing they saw on leaving the lift was a long concrete wall 
with over fifty doors in it offering lavatory facilities for all of fifty 
major lifeforms. Nevertheless, like every car park in the Galaxy 
throughout the entire history of car parks, this car park smelt 
predominantly of impatience. 
They turned a corner and found themselves on a moving catwalk 
that traversed a vast cavernous space that stretched off into the dim 
distance. 
It was divided off into bays each of which contained a space ship 
belonging to one of the diners upstairs, some smallish and utilitarian 
mass production models, others vast shining limoships, the playthings 
of the very rich. 
Zaphod's eyes sparkled with something that may or may not have 
been avarice as he passed over them. In fact it's best to be clear on 
this point`avarice is definitely what it was. 
"There he is," said Trillian, "Marvin, down there." 
They looked where she was pointing. Dimly they could see a small 
metal figure listlessly rubbing a small rag on one remote corner of a 
giant silver suncruiser. 
At short intervals along the moving catwalk, wide transparent 
tubes led down to floor level. Zaphod stepped off the catwalk into 
one and floated gently downwards. The others followed. Thinking 
back to this later, Arthur Dent thought it was the single most 
enjoyable experience of his travels in the Galaxy. 
"Hey, Marvin," said Zaphod striding over towards to him, "Hey, kid, 
are we pleased to see you." 
Marvin turned, and in so far as it is possible for a totally inert metal 
face to look reproachfully, this is what it did. 
"No you're not," he said, "no one ever is." 
"Suit yourself," said Zaphod and turned away to ogle the ships. 
Ford went with him. 
Only Trillian and Arthur actually went up to Marvin. 
"No, really we are," said Trillian and patted him in a way that he 
disliked intensely, "hanging around waiting for us all this time." 
"Five hundred and seventy`six thousand million, three thousand 
five hundred and seventy`nine years," said Marvin, "I counted them." 
"Well, here we are now," said Trillian, feeling ʹ quite correctly in 
Marvin's view ʹ that it was a slightly foolish thing to say. 
"The first ten million years were the worst," said Marvin, "and the 
second ten million years, they were the worst too. The third million 
years I didn't enjoy at all. After that I went into a bit of decline." 
He paused just long enough to make them feel they ought to say 
something, and then interrupted. 
"It's the people you meet in this job that really get you down," he 
said and paused again. 
Trillian cleared her throat. 
"Is that..." 
"The best conversation I had was over forty million years ago," 
continued Marvin. 
Again the pause. 
"Oh d..." 
"And that was with a coffee machine." 
He waited. 
"That's a..." 
"You don't like talking to me do you?" said Marvin in a low desolate 
tone. 
Trillian talked to Arthur instead. 
Further down the chamber Ford Prefect had found something of 
which he very much liked the look, several such things in fact. 
"Zaphod," he said in a quiet voice, "just look at some of these little 
star trolleys..." 
Zaphod looked and liked. 
The craft they were looking at was in fact pretty small but 
extraordinary, and very much a rich kid's toy. It was not much to look 
at. It resembled nothing so much as a paper dart about twenty feet 
long made of thin but tough metal foil. At the rear end was a small 
horizontal two`man cockpit. It had a tiny charm`drive engine, which 
was not capable of moving it at any great speed. The thing it did have, 
however, was a heat`sink. 
The heat`sink had a mass of some two thousand billion tons and 
was contained within a black hole mounted in an electromagnetic 
field situated half`way along the length of the ship, and this heat`sink 
enabled the craft to be manoeuvred to within a few miles of a yellow 
sun, there to catch and ride the solar flares that burst out from its 
surface. 
Flare`riding is one of the most exotic and exhilarating sports in 
existence, and those who can dare and afford it are amongst the most 
lionized men in the Galaxy. It is also of course stupefyingly dangerous
ʹ those who don't die riding invariably die of sexual exhaustion at one 
of the Daedalus Club's Après`Flare parties. 
Ford and Zaphod looked and passed on. 
"And this baby," said Ford, "the tangerine star buggy with the black 
sunbusters..." 
Again, the star buggy was a small ship ʹ a totally misnamed one in 
fact, because the one thing it couldn't manage was interstellar 
distances. Basically it was a sporty planet hopper dolled up to 
something it wasn't. Nice lines though. They passed on. 
The next one was a big one and thirty yards long ʹ a coach built 
limoship and obviously designed with one aim in mind, that of making 
the beholder sick with envy. The paintwork and accessory detail 
clearly said "Not only am I rich enough to afford this ship, I am also 
rich enough not to take it seriously." It was wonderfully hideous. 
"Just look at it," said Zaphod, "multi`cluster quark drive, perspulex 
running boards. Got to be a Lazlar Lyricon custom job." 
He examined every inch. 
"Yes," he said, "look, the infra`pink lizard emblem on the neutrino 
cowling. Lazlar's trade mark. The man has no shame." 
"I was passed by one of these mothers once, out by the Axel 
Nebula," said Ford, "I was going flat out and this thing just strolled 
past me, star drive hardly ticking over. Just incredible." 
Zaphod whistled appreciatively. 
"Ten seconds later", said Ford, "it smashed straight into the third 
moon of Jaglan Beta." 
"Yeah, right?" 
"Amazing looking ship though. Looks like a fish, moves like a fish, 
steers like a cow." 
Ford looked round the other side. 
"Hey, come and see," he called out, "there's a big mural painted on 
this side. A bursting sun ʹ Disaster Area's trade mark. This must be 
Hotblack's ship. Lucky old bugger. They do this terrible song you know 
which ends with a stuntship crashing into the sun. Meant to be an 
amazing spectacle. Expensive in stunt ships though." 
Zaphod's attention however was elsewhere. His attention was 
riveted on the ship standing next to Hotblack Desiato's limo. His 
mouths hung open. 
"That," he said, "that... is really bad for the eyes..." 
Ford looked. He too stood astonished. 
It was a ship of classic, simple design, like a flattened salmon, 
twenty yards long, very clean, very sleek. There was just one 
remarkable thing about it. 
"It's so... black " said Ford Prefect, "you can hardly make out its 
shape... light just seems to fall into it " 
Zaphod said nothing. He had simply fallen in love. 
The blackness of it was so extreme that it was almost impossible to 
tell how close you were standing to it. 
"Your eyes just slide off it..." said Ford in wonder. It was an 
emotional moment. He bit his lip. 
Zaphod moved forward to it, slowly, like a man possessed ʹ or 
more accurately like a man who wanted to possess. His hand reached 
out to stroke it. His hand stopped. His hand reached out to stroke it 
again. His hand stopped again. 
"Come and feel the surface," he said in a hushed voice. 
Ford put his hand out to feel it. His hand stopped. 
"You... you can't..." he said. 
"See?" said Zaphod, "it's just totally frictionless. This must be one 
mother of a mover..." 
He turned to look at Ford seriously. At least, one of his heads did ʹ
the other stayed gazing in awe at the ship. 
"What do you reckon, Ford?" he said. 
"You mean... er..." Ford looked over his shoulder. "You mean stroll 
off with it? You think we should?" 
"No." 
"Nor do I." 
"But we're going to, aren't we?" 
"How can we not?" 
They gazed a little longer, till Zaphod suddenly pulled himself 
together. 
"We better shift soon," he said. "In a moment or so the Universe 
will have ended and all the Captain Creeps will be pouring down here 
to find their bourge`mobiles." 
"Zaphod," said Ford. 
"Yeah?" 
"How do we do it?" 
"Simple," said Zaphod. He turned. "Marvin " he called. 
Slowly, laboriously, and with a million little clanking and creaking 
noises that he had learned to simulate, Marvin turned round to 
answer the summons. 
"Come on over here," said Zaphod, "We've got a job for you." 
Marvin trudged towards them. 
"I won't enjoy it," he said. 
"Yes you will," enthused Zaphod, "there's a whole new life 
stretching out ahead of you." 
"Oh, not another one," groaned Marvin. 
"Will you shut up and listen " hissed Zaphod, "this time there's 
going to be excitement and adventure and really wild things." 
"Sounds awful," Marvin said. 
"Marvin  All I'm trying to ask you..." 
"I suppose you want me to open this spaceship for you?" 
"What? Er... yes. Yeah, that's right," said Zaphod jumpily. He was 
keeping at least three eyes on the entrance. Time was short. 
"Well I wish you'd just tell me rather than try to engage my 
enthusiasm," said Marvin, "because I haven't got one." 
He walked on up to the ship, touched it, and a hatchway swung 
open. 
Ford and Zaphod stared at the opening. 
"Don't mention it," said Marvin, "Oh, you didn't." He trudged away 
again. 
Arthur and Trillian clustered round. 
"What's happening?" asked Arthur. 
"Look at this," said Ford, "look at the interior of this ship." 
"Weirder and weirder," breathed Zaphod. 
"It's black," said Ford, "Everything in it is just totally black..." 
In the Restaurant, things were fast approaching the moment after 
which there wouldn't be any more moments. 
All eyes were fixed on the dome, other than those of Hotblack 
Desiato's bodyguard, which were looking intently at Hotblack Desiato, 
and those of Hotblack Desiato himself which the bodyguard had 
closed out of respect. 
The bodyguard leaned forward over the table. Had Hotblack 
Desiato been alive, he probably would have deemed this a good 
moment to lean back, or even go for a short walk. His bodyguard was 
not a man which improved with proximity. On account of his 
unfortunate condition, however, Hotblack Desiato remained totally 
inert. 
"Mr. Desiato, sir?" whispered the bodyguard. Whenever he spoke, 
it looked as if the muscles on either side of his mouth were 
clambering over each other to get out of the way. 
"Mr. Desiato? Can you hear me?" 
Hotblack Desiato, quit naturally, said nothing. 
"Hotblack?" hissed the bodyguard. 
Again, quite naturally, Hotblack Desiato did not reply. 
Supernaturally, however, he did. 
On the table in front of him a wine glass rattled, and a fork rose an 
inch or so and tapped against the glass. It settled on the table again. 
The bodyguard gave a satisfied grunt. 
"It's time we get going, Mr. Desiato," muttered the bodyguard, 
"don't want to get caught in the rush, not in your condition. You want 
to get to the next gig nice and relaxed. There was a really big 
audience for it. One of the best. Kakrafoon. Five`hundred seventy`six 
thousand and two million years ago. Had you will have been looking 
forward to it?" 
The fork rose again, waggled in a non`committal sort of way and 
dropped again. 
"Ah, come on," said the bodyguard, "it's going to have been great. 
You knocked 'em cold." The bodyguard would have given Dr. Dan 
Streetmentioner an apoplectic attack. 
"The black ship going into the sun always gets 'em, and the new 
one's a beauty. Be real sorry to see it go. If we get on down there, I'll 
set the black ship autopilot and we'll cruise off in the limo. OK?" 
The fork tapped once in agreement, and the glass of wine 
mysteriously emptied itself. 
The bodyguard wheeled Hotblack Desiato's chair out of the 
Restaurant. 
"And now," cried Max from the centre of the stage, "the moment 
you've all been waiting for " He flung his arms into the air. Behind him, 
the band went into a frenzy of percussion and rolling synthochords. 
Max had argued with them about this but they had claimed it was in 
their contract that that's what they would do. His agent would have 
to sort it out. 
"The skies begin to boil " he cried. "Nature collapses into the 
screaming void  In twenty seconds' time, the Universe itself will be at 
an end  See where the light of infinity bursts in upon us " 
The hideous fury of destruction blazed about them ʹ and at that 
moment a still small trumpet sounded as from an infinite distance. 
Max's eyes swivelled round to glare at the band. None of them 
seemed to be playing a trumpet. Suddenly a wisp of smoke was 
swirling and shimmering on the stage next to him. The trumpet was 
joined by more trumpets. Over five hundred times Max had done this 
show, and nothing like this had ever happened before. He drew back 
in alarm from the swirling smoke, and as he did so, a figure slowly 
materialized inside, the figure of an ancient man, bearded, robed and 
wreathed in light. In his eyes were stars and on his brow a golden 
crown. 
"What's this?" whispered Max, wild`eyed, "what's happening?" 
At the back of the Restaurant the stony`faced party from the 
Church of the Second Coming of the Great Prophet Zarquon leapt 
ecstatically to their feet chanting and crying. 
Max blinked in amazement. He threw up his arms to the audience. 
"A big hand please, ladies and gentlemen," he hollered, "for the 
Great Prophet Zarquon  He has come  Zarquon has come again " 
Thunderous applause broke out as Max strode across the stage and 
handed his microphone to the Prophet. 
Zarquon coughed. He peered round at the assembled gathering. 
The stars in his eyes blinked uneasily. He handled the microphone 
with confusion. 
"Er..." he said, "hello. Er, look, I'm sorry I'm a bit late. I've had the 
most ghastly time, all sorts of things cropping up at the last moment." 
He seemed nervous of the expectant awed hush. He cleared his 
throat. 
"Er, how are we for time?" he said, "have I just got a min ʹ " 
And so the Universe ended. 
Chapter 19
One of the major selling point of that wholly remarkable travel 
book, the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, apart from its relative 
cheapness and the fact that it has the words DON'T PANIC written in 
large friendly letters on its cover, is its compendious and occasionally 
accurate glossary. The statistics relating to the geo`social nature of 
the Universe, for instance, are deftly set out between pages nine 
hundred and thirty`eight thousand and twenty`four and nine hundred 
and thirty`eight thousand and twenty`six; and the simplistic style in 
which they are written is partly explained by the fact that the editors, 
having to meet a publishing deadline, copied the information off the 
back of a packet of breakfast cereal, hastily embroidering it with a few 
footnoted in order to avoid prosecution under the incomprehensibly 
tortuous Galactic Copyright laws. 
It is interesting to note that a later and wilier editor sent the book 
backwards in time through a temporal warp, and then successfully 
sued the breakfast cereal company for infringement of the same laws. 
Here is a sample: 
The Universe ʹ some information to help you live in it. 
1~Area: Infinite. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy offers this definition of the 
word "Infinite". 
Infinite: Bigger than the biggest thing ever and then some. Much 
bigger than that in fact, really amazingly immense, a totally stunning 
size, "wow, that's big", time. Infinity is just so big that by comparison, 
bigness itself looks really titchy. Gigantic multiplied by colossal 
multiplied by staggeringly huge is the sort of concept we're trying to 
get across here. 
2~Imports: None. 
It is impossible to import things into an infinite area, there being no 
outside to import things in from. 
3~Exports: None. 
See imports. 
4~Population: None. 
It is known that there are an infinite number of worlds, simply 
because there is an infinite amount of space for them to be in. 
However, not every one of them is inhabited. Therefore, there must 
be a finite number of inhabited worlds. Any finite number divided by 
infinity is as near to nothing as makes no odds, so the average 
population of all the planets in the Universe can be said to be zero. 
From this it follows that the population of the whole Universe is also 
zero, and that any people you may meet from time to time are merely 
the products of a deranged imagination. 
5~Monetary Units: None. 
In fact there are three freely convertible currencies in the Galaxy, 
but none of them count. The Altairan Dollar has recently collapsed, 
the Flaninian Pobble Bead is only exchangeable for other Flaninian 
Pobble Beads, and the Triganic Pu has its own very special problems. 
Its exchange rate of eight Ningis to one Pu is simple enough, but since 
a Ningi is a triangular rubber coin six thousand eight hundred miles 
across each side, no one has ever collected enough to own one Pu. 
Ningis are not negotiable currency because the Galactibanks refuse to 
deal in fiddling small change. From this basic premise it is very simple 
to prove that the Galactibanks are also the product of a deranged 
imagination. 
6~Art: None. 
The function of art is to hold the mirror up to nature, and there 
simply isn't a mirror big enough ʹ see point one. 
7~Sex: None. 
Well, in fact there is an awful lot of this, largely because of the total 
lack of money, trade, banks, art, or anything else that might keep all 
the non`existent people of the Universe occupied. 
However, it is not worth embarking on a long discussion of it now 
because it really is terribly complicated. For further information see 
Guide chapters seven, nine, ten, eleven, fourteen, sixteen, seventeen, 
nineteen, twenty`one to eighty`four inclusive, and in fact most of the 
rest of the Guide. 
Chapter 20
The Restaurant continued existing, but everything else had stopped. 
Temporal relastatics held it and protected it in a nothingness that 
wasn't merely a vacuum, it was simply nothing ʹ there was nothing in 
which a vacuum could be said to exist. 
The force`shielded dome had once again been rendered opaque, 
the party was over, the diners were leaving, Zarquon had vanished 
along with the rest of the Universe, the Time Turbines were preparing 
to pull the Restaurant back across the brink of time in readiness for 
the lunch sitting, and Max Quordlepleen was back in his small 
curtained dressing room trying to raise his agent on the tempophone. 
In the car park stood the black ship, closed and silent. 
In to the car park came the late Mr. Hotblack Desiato, propelled 
along the moving catwalk by his bodyguard. 
They descended one of the tubes. As they approached the limoship 
a hatchway swung down from its side, engaged the wheels of the 
wheelchair and drew it inside. The bodyguard followed, and having 
seen his boss safely connected up to his death`support system, 
moved up to the small cockpit. Here he operated the remote control 
system which activated the autopilot in the black ship lying next to 
the limo, thus causing great relief to Zaphod Beeblebrox who had 
been trying to start the thing for over ten minutes. 
The black ship glided smoothly forward out of its bay, turned, and 
moved down the central causeway swiftly and quietly. At the end it 
accelerated rapidly, flung itself into the temporal launch chamber and 
began the long journey back into the distant past. 
The Milliways Lunch Menu quotes, by permission, a passage from 
the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. The passage is this: 
The History of every major Galactic Civilization tends to pass 
through three distinct and recognizable phases, those of Survival, 
Inquiry and Sophistication, otherwise known as the How, Why and 
Where phases. 
For instance, the first phase is characterized by the question "How 
can we eat?", the second by the question "Why do we eat?" and the 
third by the question, "Where shall we have lunch?" 
The Menu goes on to suggest that Milliways, the Restaurant at the 
End of the Universe, would be a very agreeable and sophisticated 
answer to that third question. 
What it doesn't go on to say is that though it will usually take a 
large civilization many thousands of years to pass through the How, 
Why and Where phases, small social groupings under stressful 
conditions can pass through them with extreme rapidity. 
"How are we doing?" said Arthur Dent. 
"Badly," said Ford Prefect. 
"Where are we going?" said Trillian. 
"I don't know," said Zaphod Beeblebrox. 
"Why not?" demanded Arthur Dent. 
"Shut up," suggested Zaphod Beeblebrox and Ford Prefect. 
"Basically, what you're trying to say," said Arthur Dent, ignoring 
this suggestion, "is that we're out of control." 
The ship was rocking and swaying sickeningly as Ford and Zaphod 
tried to wrest control from the autopilot. The engined howled and 
whined like tired children in a supermarket. 
"It's the wild colour scheme that freaks me," said Zaphod whose 
love affair with this ship had lasted almost three minutes into the 
flight, "Every time you try to operate on of these weird black controls 
that are labelled in black on a black background, a little black light 
lights up black to let you know you've done it. What is this? Some kind 
of galactic hyperhearse?" 
The walls of the swaying cabin were also black, the ceiling was 
black, the seats ʹ which were rudimentary since the only important 
trip this ship was designed for was supposed to be unmanned ʹ were 
black, the control panel was black, the instruments were black, the 
little screws that held them in place were black, the thin tufted nylon 
floor covering was black, and when they had lifted up a corner of it 
they had discovered that the foam underlay also was black. 
"Perhaps whoever designed it had eyes that responded to different 
wavelengths," offered Trillian. 
"Or didn't have much imagination," muttered Arthur. 
"Perhaps," said Marvin, "he was feeling very depressed." 
In fact, though they weren't to know it, the decor had been chosen 
in honour of its owner's sad, lamented, and tax`deductible condition. 
The ship gave a particularly sickening lurch. 
"Take it easy," pleaded Arthur, "you're making me space sick." 
"Time sick," said Ford, "we're plummeting backwards through 
time." 
"Thank you," said Arthur, "now I think I really am going to be ill." 
"Go ahead," said Zaphod, "we could do with a little colour about 
this place." 
"This is meant to be a polite after`dinner conversation is it?" 
snapped Arthur. 
Zaphod left the controls for Ford to figure out, and lurched over to 
Arthur. 
"Look, Earthman," he said angrily, "you've got a job to do, right? 
The Question to the Ultimate Answer, right?" 
"What, that thing?" said Arthur, "I thought we'd forgotten about 
that." 
"Not me, baby. Like the mice said, it's worth a lot of money in the 
right quarters. And it's all locked up in that head thing of yours." 
"Yes but..." 
"But nothing  Think about it. The Meaning of Life  We get our 
fingers on that we can hold every shrink in the Galaxy up to ransom, 
and that's worth a bundle. I owe mine a mint." 
Arthur took a deep breath without much enthusiasm. 
"Alright," he said, "but where do we start? How should I know? 
They say the Ultimate Answer or whatever is Forty`two, how am I 
supposed to know what the question is? It could be anything. I mean, 
what's six times seven?" 
Zaphod looked at him hard for a moment. Then his eyes blazed 
with excitement. 
"Forty`two " he cried. 
Arthur wiped his palm across his forehead. 
"Yes," he said patiently," I know that." 
Zaphod's faces fell. 
"I'm just saying that the question could be anything at all," said 
Arthur, "and I don't see how I am meant to know." 
"Because," hissed Zaphod, "you were there when your planet did 
the big firework." 
"We have a thing on Earth..." began Arthur. 
"Had," corrected Zaphod. 
"... called tact. Oh never mind. Look, I just don't know." 
A low voice echoed dully round the cabin. 
"I know," said Marvin. 
Ford called out from the controls he was still fighting a losing battle 
with. 
"Stay out of this Marvin," he said, "this is organism talk." 
"It's printed in the Earthman's brainwave patterns," continued 
Marvin, "but I don't suppose you'll be very interested in knowing 
that." 
"You mean," said Arthur, "you mean you can see into my mind?" 
"Yes," said Marvin. 
Arthur stared in astonishment. 
"And...?" he said. 
"It amazes me how you can manage to live in anything that small." 
"Ah," said Arthur, "abuse." 
"Yes," confirmed Marvin. 
"Ah, ignore him," said Zaphod, "he's only making it up." 
"Making it up?" said Marvin, swivelling his head in a parody of 
astonishment, "Why should I want to make anything up? Life's bad 
enough as it is without wanting to invent any more of it." 
"Marvin," said Trillian in the gentle, kindly voice that only she was 
still capable of assuming in talking to this misbegotten creature, "if 
you knew all along, why then didn't you tell us?" 
Marvin's head swivelled back to her. 
"You didn't ask," he said simply. 
"Well, we're asking you now, metal man," said Ford, turning round 
to look at him. 
At that moment the ship suddenly stopped rocking and swaying, 
the engine pitch settled down to a gentle hum. 
"Hey, Ford," said Zaphod, "that sounds good. Have you worked out 
the controls of this boat?" 
"No," said Ford, "I just stopped fiddling with them. I reckon we just 
go to wherever this ship is going and get off it fast." 
"Yeah, right," said Zaphod. 
"I could tell you weren't really interested," murmured Marvin to 
himself and slumped into a corner and switched himself off. 
"Trouble is," said Ford, "that the one instrument in this while ship 
that is giving any reading is worrying me. If it is what I think it is, and if 
it's saying what I think it's saying, then we've already gone too far 
back into the past. Maybe as much as two million years before our 
own time." 
Zaphod shrugged. 
"Time is bunk," he said. 
"I wonder who this ship belongs to anyway," said Arthur. 
"Me," said Zaphod. 
"No. Who it really belongs to." 
"Really me," insisted Zaphod, "look, property is theft, right? 
Therefore theft is property. Therefore this ship is mine, OK?" 
"Tell the ship that," said Arthur. 
Zaphod strode over to the console. 
"Ship," he said, banging on the panels, "this is your new owner 
speaking to..." 
He got no further. Several things happened at once. 
The ship dropped out of time travel mode and re`emerged into real 
space. 
All the controls on the console, which had been shut down for the 
time trip now lit up. 
A large vision screen above the console winked into life revealing a 
wide starscape and a single very large sun dead ahead of them. 
None of these things, however, were responsible for the fact that 
Zaphod was at the same moment hurled bodily backwards against the 
rear of the cabin, as were all the others. 
They were hurled back by a single thunderous clap of noise that 
thuddered out of the monitor speakers surrounding the vision screen. 
Chapter 21
Down on the dry, red world of Kakrafoon, in the middle of the vast 
Rudlit Desert, the stage technicians were testing the sound system. 
That is to say, the sound system was in the desert, not the stage 
technicians. They had retreated to the safety of Disaster Area's giant 
control ship which hung in orbit some four hundred miles above the 
surface of the planet, and they were testing the sound system from 
there. Anyone within five miles of the speaker silos wouldn't have 
survived the tuning up. 
If Arthur Dent had been within five miles of the speaker silos then 
his expiring thought would have been that in both size and shape the 
sound rig closely resembled Manhattan. Risen out of the silos, the 
neutron phase speaker stacks towered monstrously against the sky, 
obscuring the banks of plutonium reactors and seismic amps behind 
them. 
Buried deep in concrete bunkers beneath the city of speakers lay 
the instruments that the musicians would control from their ship, the 
massive photon`ajuitar, the bass detonator and the Megabang drum 
complex. 
It was going to be a noisy show. 
Aboard the giant control ship, all was activity and bustle. Hotblack 
Desiato's limoship, a mere tadpole beside it, had arrived and docked, 
and the lamented gentleman was being transported down the high 
vaulted corridors to meet the medium who was going to interpret his 
psychic impulses on to the ajuitar keyboard. 
A doctor, a logician and a marine biologist had also just arrived, 
flown in at phenomenal expense from Maximegalon to try to reason 
with the lead singer who had locked himself in the bathroom with a 
bottle of pills and was refusing to come out till it could be proved 
conclusively to him that he wasn't a fish. The bass player was busy 
machine`gunning his bedroom and the drummer was nowhere on 
board. 
Frantic inquiries led to the discovery that he was standing on a 
beach on Santraginus V over a hundred light years away where, he 
claimed, he had been happy over half an hour now and had found a 
small stone that would be his friend. 
The band's manager was profoundly relieved. It meant that for the 
seventeenth time on this tour the drums would be played by a robot 
and that therefore the timing of the cymbalistics would be right. 
The sub`ether was buzzing with the communications of the stage 
technicians testing the speaker channels, and this it was that was 
being relayed to the interior of the black ship. 
Its dazed occupants lay against the back wall of the cabin, and 
listened to the voices on the monitor speakers. 
"OK, channel nine on power," said a voice, "testing channel 
fifteen..." 
Another thumping crack of noise walloped through the ship. 
"Channel fifteen AOK," said another voice. 
A third voice cut in. 
"The black stunt ship is now in position," it said, "it's looking good. 
Gonna be a great sundive. Stage computer on line?" 
A computer voice answered. 
"On line," it said. 
"Take control of the black ship." 
"Black ship locked into trajectory programme, on standby." 
"Testing channel twenty." 
Zaphod leaped across the cabin and switched frequencies on the 
sub`ether receiver before the next mind`pulverizing noise hit them. 
He stood there quivering. 
"What," said Trillian in a small quiet voice, "does sundive mean?" 
"It means," said Marvin, "that the ship os going to dive into the sun. 
Sun... Dive. It's very simple to understand. What do you expect if you 
steal Hotblack Desiato's stunt ship?" 
"How do you know..." said Zaphod in a voice that would make a 
Vegan snow lizard feel chilly, "that this is Hotblack Desiato's 
stuntship?" 
"Simple," said Marvin, "I parked it for him." 
"The why... didn't... you... tell us " 
"You said you wanted excitement and adventure and really wild 
things." 
"This is awful," said Arthur unnecessarily in the pause which 
followed. 
"That's what I said," confirmed Marvin. 
On a different frequency, the sub`ether receiver had picked up a 
public broadcast, which now echoed round the cabin. 
"... fine weather for the concert here this afternoon. I'm standing 
here in front of the stage," the reporter lied, "in the middle of the 
Rudlit Desert, and with the aid of hyperbinoptic glasses I can just 
about make out the huge audience cowering there on the horizon all 
around me. Behind me the speaker stacks rise like a sheer cliff face, 
and high above me the sun is shining away and doesn't know what's 
going to hit it. The environmentalist lobby do know what's going to hit 
it, and they claim that the concert will cause earthquakes, tidal waves, 
hurricanes, irreparable damage to the atmosphere, and all the usual 
things that environmentalists usually go on about. 
"But I've just had a report that a representative of Disaster Area 
met with the environmentalists at lunchtime, and had them all shot, 
so nothing now lies in the way of..." 
Zaphod switched it off. He turned to Ford. 
"You know what I'm thinking?" he said. 
"I think so," said Ford. 
"Tell me what you think I'm thinking." 
"I think you're thinking it's time we get off this ship." 
"I think you're right," said Zaphod. 
"I think you're right," said Ford. 
"How?" said Arthur. 
"Quiet," said Ford and Zaphod, "we're thinking." 
"So this is it," said Arthur, "we're going to die." 
"I wish you'd stop saying that," said Ford. 
It is worth repeating at this point the theories that Ford had come 
up with, on his first encounter with human beings, to account for 
their peculiar habit of continually stating and restating the very very 
obvious, as it 'It's a nice day," or "You're very tall," or "So this is it, 
we're going to die." 
His first theory was that if human beings didn't keep exercising 
their lips, their mouths probably seized up. 
After a few months of observation he had come up with a second 
theory, which was this ʹ "If human beings don't keep exercising their 
lips, their brains start working." 
In fact, this second theory is more literally true of the Belcebron 
people of Kakrafoon. 
The Belcebron people used to cause great resentment and 
insecurity amongst neighboring races by being one of the most 
enlightened, accomplished, and above all quiet civilizations in the 
Galaxy. 
As a punishment for this behaviour, which was held to be 
offensively self righteous and provocative, a Galactic Tribunal inflicted 
on them that most cruel of all social diseases, telepathy. 
Consequently, in order to prevent themselves broadcasting every 
slightest thought that crossed their minds to anyone within a five mile 
radius, they now have to talk very loudly and continuously about the 
weather, their little aches and pains, the match this afternoon and 
what a noisy place Kakrafoon had suddenly become. 
Another method of temporarily blotting out their minds is to play 
host to a Disaster Area concert. 
The timing of the concert was critical. 
The ship had to begin its dive before the concert began in order to 
hit the sun six minutes and thirty`seven seconds before the climax of 
the song to which it related, so that the light of the solar flares had 
time to travel out to Kakrafoon. 
The ship had already been diving for several minutes by the time 
that Ford Prefect had completed his search of the other 
compartments of the black ship. He burst back into the cabin. 
The sun of Kakrafoon loomed terrifyingly large on the vision screen, 
its blazing white inferno of fusing hydrogen nuclei growing moment 
by moment as the ship plunged onwards, unheeding the thumping 
and banging of Zaphod's hands on the control panel. Arthur and 
Trillian had the fixed expressions of rabbits on a night road who think 
that the best way of dealing with approaching headlights is to stare 
them out. 
Zaphod span round, wild`eyed. 
"Ford," he said, "how many escape capsules are there?" 
"None," said Ford. 
Zaphod gibbered. 
"Did you count them?" he yelled. 
"Twice," said Ford, "did you manage to raise the stage crew on the 
radio?" 
"Yeah," said Zaphod, bitterly, "I said there were a whole bunch of 
people on board, and they said to say 'hi' to everybody." 
Ford goggled. 
"Didn't you tell them who we were?" 
"Oh yeah. They said it was a great honour. That and something 
about a restaurant bill and my executors." 
Ford pushed Arthur aside and leaned forward over the control 
console. 
"Does none of this function?" he said savagely. 
"All overridden." 
"Smash the autopilot." 
"Find it first. Nothing connects." 
There was a moment's cold silence. 
Arthur was stumbling round the back of the cabin. He stopped 
suddenly. 
"Incidentally," he said, "what does teleport mean?" 
Another moment passed. 
Slowly, the others turned to face him. 
"Probably the wrong moment to ask," said Arthur, "It's just I 
remember hearing you use the word a short while ago and I only 
bring it up because..." 
"Where," said Ford Prefect quietly, "does it say teleport?" 
"Well, just over here in fact," said Arthur, pointing at a dark control 
box in the rear of the cabin, "Just under the word 'emergency', above 
the word 'system' and beside the sign saying 'out of order'." 
In the pandemonium that instantly followed, the only action to 
follow was that of Ford Prefect lunging across the cabin to the small 
black box that Arthur had indicated and stabbing repeatedly at the 
single small black button set into it. 
A six`foot square panel slid open beside it revealing a compartment 
which resembled a multiple shower unit that had found a new 
function in life as an electrician's junk store. Half`finished wiring hung 
from the ceiling, a jumble of abandoned components lay strewn on 
the floor, and the programming panel lolled out of the cavity in the 
wall into which it should have been secured. 
A junior Disaster Area accountant, visiting the shipyard where this 
ship was being constructed, had demanded to know of the works 
foreman why the hell they were fitting an extremely expensive 
teleport into a ship which only had one important journey to make, 
and that unmanned. The foreman had explained that the teleport was 
available at a ten percent discount and the accountant had explained 
that this was immaterial; the foreman had explained that it was the 
finest, most powerful and sophisticated teleport that money could 
buy and the accountant had explained that the money did not wish to 
buy it; the foreman had explained that people would still need to 
enter and leave the ship and the accountant had explained that the 
ship sported a perfectly serviceable door; the foreman had explained 
that the accountant could go and boil his head and the accountant 
had explained to the foreman that the thing approaching him rapidly 
from his left was a knuckle sandwich. After the explanations had been 
concluded, work was discontinued on the teleport which 
subsequently passed unnoticed on the invoice as "Sund. explns." at 
five times the price. 
"Hell's donkeys," muttered Zaphod as he and Ford attempted to 
sort through the tangle of wiring. 
After a moment or so Ford told him to stand back. He tossed a coin 
into the teleport and jiggled a switch on the lolling control panel. With 
a crackle and spit of light, the coin vanished. 
"That much of it works," said Ford, "however, there is no guidance 
system. A matter transference teleport without guidance 
programming could put you... well, anywhere." 
The sun of Kakrafoon loomed huge on the screen. 
"Who cares," said Zaphod, "we go where we go." 
"And," said Ford, "there is no autosystem. We couldn't all go. 
Someone would have to stay and operate it." 
A solemn moment shuffled past. The sun loomed larger and larger. 
"Hey, Marvin kid," said Zaphod brightly, "how you doing?" 
"Very badly I suspect," muttered Marvin. 
A shortish while later, the concert on Kakrafoon reached an 
unexpected climax. 
The black ship with its single morose occupant had plunged on 
schedule into the nuclear furnace of the sun. Massive solar flares 
licked out from it millions of miles into space, thrilling and in a few 
cases spilling the dozen or so Flare Riders who had been coasting 
close to the surface of the sun in anticipation of the moment. 
Moments before the flare light reached Kakrafoon the pounding 
desert cracked along a deep faultline. A huge and hitherto undetected 
underground river lying far beneath the surface gushed to the surface 
to be followed seconds later by the eruption of millions of tons of 
boiling lava that flowed hundreds of feet into the air, instantaneously 
vaporizing the river both above and below the surface in an explosion 
that echoed to the far side of the world and back again. 
Those`very few`who witnessed the event and survived swear that 
the whole hundred thousand square miles of the desert rose into the 
air like a mile`thick pancake, flipped itself over and fell back down. At 
that precise moment the solar radiation from the flares filtered 
through the clouds of vaporized water and struck the ground. 
A year later, the hundred thousand square mile desert was thick 
with flowers. The structure of the atmosphere around the planet was 
subtly altered. The sun blazed less harshly in the summer, the cold bit 
less bitterly in the winter, pleasant rain fell more often, and slowly the 
desert world of Kakrafoon became a paradise. Even the telepathic 
power with which the people of Kakrafoon had been cursed was 
permanently dispersed by the force of the explosion. 
A spokesman for Disaster Area ʹ the one who had had all the 
environmentalists shot ʹ was later quoted as saying that it had been 
"a good gig". 
Many people spoke movingly of the healing powers of music. A few 
sceptical scientists examined the records of the events more closely, 
and claimed that they had discovered faint vestiges of a vast 
artificially induced Improbability Field drifting in from a nearby region 
of space. 

Chapter 22
Arthur woke up and instantly regretted it. Hangovers he'd had, but 
never anything on this scale. This was it, this was the big one, this was 
the ultimate pits. Matter transference beams, he decided, were not 
as much fun as, say, a good solid kick in the head. 
Being for the moment unwilling to move on account of a dull 
stomping throb he was experiencing, he lay a while and thought. The 
trouble with most forms of transport, he thought, is basically one of 
them not being worth all the bother. On Earth ʹ when there had been 
an Earth, before it was demolished to make way for a new hyperspace 
bypass ʹ the problem had been with cars. The disadvantages involved 
in pulling lots of black sticky slime from out of the ground where it 
had been safely hidden out of harm's way, turning it into tar to cover 
the land with, smoke to fill the air with and pouring the rest into the 
sea, all seemed to outweigh the advantages of being able to get more 
quickly from one place to another ʹ particularly when the place you 
arrived at had probably become, as a result of this, very similar to the 
place you had left, i.e. covered with tar, full of smoke and short of fish. 
And what about matter transference beams? Any form of transport 
which involved tearing you apart atom by atom, flinging those atoms 
through the sub`ether, and then jamming them back together again 
just when they were getting their first taste of freedom for years had 
to be bad news. 
Many people had thought exactly this before Arthur Dent and had 
even gone to the lengths of writing songs about it. Here is one that 
used regularly to be chanted by huge crowds outside the Sirius 
Cybernetics Corporation Teleport Systems factory on Happi`Werld III: 
Aldebaran's great, OK, 
Algol's pretty neat, 
Betelgeuse's pretty girls, 
Will knock you off your feet. 
They'll do anything you like, 
Real fast and then real slow, 
But if you have to take me apart to get me there, 
Then I don't want to go. 
Singing, 
Take me apart, take me apart, 
What a way to roam, 
And if you have to take me apart to get me there, 
I'd rather stay at home. 
Sirius is paved with gold 
So I've heard it said 
By nuts who then go on to say 
"See Tau before you're dead." 
I'll gladly take the high road 
Or even take the low, 
But if you have to take me apart to get me there, 
Then I, for one, won't go. 
Singing, 
Take me apart, take me apart, You must be off your head, 
And if you try to take me apart to get me there, 
I'll stay right here in bed. 
... and so on. Another favorite song was much shorter: 
I teleported home one night, 
With Ron and Sid and Meg, 
Ron stole Meggie's heart away, 
And I got Sidney's leg. 
Arthur felt the waves of pain slowly receding, though he was still 
aware of a dull stomping throb. Slowly, carefully, he stood up. 
"Can you hear a dull stomping throb?" said Ford Prefect. 
Arthur span round and wobbled uncertainly. Ford Prefect was 
approaching looking red eyed and pasty. 
"Where are we?" gasped Arthur. 
Ford looked around. They were standing in a long curving corridor 
which stretched out of sight in both directions. The outer steel wall ʹ
which was painted in that sickly shade of pale green which they use in 
schools, hospitals and mental asylums to keep the inmates subdued ʹ
curved over the tops of their heads where it met the inner 
perpendicular wall which, oddly enough was covered in dark brown 
hessian wall weave. The floor was of dark green ribbed rubber. 
Ford moved over to a very thick dark transparent panel set in the 
outer wall. It was several layers deep, yet through it he could see 
pinpoints of distant stars. 
"I think we're in a spaceship of some kind," he said. 
Down the corridor came the sound of a dull stomping throb. 
"Trillian?" called Arthur nervously, "Zaphod?"
Ford shrugged. 
"Nowhere about," he said, "I've looked. They could be anywhere. 
An unprogrammed teleport can throw you light years in any direction. 
Judging by the way I feel I should think we've travelled a very long 
way indeed." 
"How do you feel?" 
"Bad." 
"Do you think they're..." 
"Where they are, how they are, there's no way we can know and 
no way we can do anything about it. Do what I do." 
"What?" 
"Don't think about it." 
Arthur turned this thought over in his mind, reluctantly saw the 
wisdom of it, tucked it up and put it away. He took a deep breath. 
"Footsteps " exclaimed Ford suddenly. 
"Where?" 
"That noise. That stomping throb. Pounding feet. Listen " 
Arthur listened. The noise echoed round the corridor at them from 
an indeterminate distance. It was the muffled sound of pounding 
footsteps, and it was noticeably louder. 
"Let's move," said Ford sharply. They both moved`in opposite 
directions. 
"Not that way," said Ford, "that's where they're coming from." 
"No it's not," said Arthur, "They're coming from that way." 
"They're not, they're..." 
They both stopped. They both turned. They both listened intently. 
They both agreed with each other. They both set off into opposite 
directions again. 
Fear gripped them. 
From both directions the noise was getting louder. 
A few yards to their left another corridor ran at right angles to the 
inner wall. They ran to it and hurried along it. It was dark, immensely 
long and, as they passed down it, gave them the impression that it 
was getting colder and colder. Other corridors gave off it to the left 
and right, each very dark and each subjecting them to sharp blasts of 
icy air as they passed. 
They stopped for a moment in alarm. The further down the 
corridor they went, the louder became the sound of pounding feet. 
They pressed themselves back against the cold wall and listened 
furiously. The cold, the dark and the drumming of disembodied feet 
was getting to them badly. Ford shivered, partly with the cold, but 
partly with the memory of stories his favourite mother used to tell 
him when he was a mere slip of a Betelgeusian, ankle high to an 
Arcturan Megagrasshopper: stories of dead ships, haunted hulks that 
roamed restlessly round the obscurer regions of deep space infested 
with demons or the ghosts of forgotten crews; stories too of 
incautious travellers who found and entered such ships; stories of... ʹ
then Ford remembered the brown hessian wall weave in the first 
corridor and pulled himself together. However ghosts and demons 
may choose to decorate their death hulks, he thought to himself, he 
would lay any money you liked it wasn't with hessian wall weave. He 
grasped Arthur by the arm. 
"Back the way we came," he said firmly and they started to retrace 
their steps. 
A moment later they leap like startled lizards down the nearest 
corridor junction as the owners of the drumming feet suddenly hove 
into view directly in front of them. 
Hidden behind the corner they goggled in amazement as about two 
dozen overweight men and women pounded past them in track suits 
panting and wheezing in a manner that would make a heart surgeon 
gibber. 
Ford Prefect stared after them. 
"Joggers " he hissed, as the sound of their feet echoed away up 
and down the network of corridors. 
"Joggers?" whispered Arthur Dent. 
"Joggers," said Ford Prefect with a shrug. 
The corridor they were concealed in was not like the others. It was 
very short, and ended at a large steel door. Ford examined it, 
discovered the opening mechanism and pushed it wide. 
The first thing that hit their eyes was what appeared to be a coffin. 
And the next four thousand nine hundred and ninety`nine things 
that hit their eyes were also coffins. 
Chapter 23
The vault was low ceilinged, dimly lit and gigantic. At the far end, 
about three hundred yards away an archway let through to what 
appeared to be a similar chamber, similarly occupied. 
Ford Prefect let out a low whistle as he stepped down on to the 
floor of the vault. 
"Wild," he said. 
"What's so great about dead people?" asked Arthur, nervously 
stepping down after him. 
"Dunno," said Ford, "Let's find out shall we?" 
On closer inspection the coffins seemed to be more like sarcophagi. 
They stood about waist high and were constructed of what appeared 
to be white marble, which is almost certainly what it was ʹ something 
that only appeared to be white marble. The tops were semi`
translucent, and through them could dimly be perceived the features 
of their late and presumably lamented occupants. They were 
humanoid, and had clearly left the troubles of whatever world it was 
they came from far behind them, but beyond that little else could be 
discerned. 
Rolling slowly round the floor between the sarcophagi was a heavy, 
oily white gas which Arthur at first thought might be there to give the 
place a little atmosphere until he discovered that it also froze his 
ankles. The sarcophagi too were intensely cold to the touch. 
Ford suddenly crouched down beside one of them. He pulled a 
corner of his towel out of his satchel and started to rub furiously at 
something. 
"Look, there's a plaque on this one," he explained to Arthur, "It's 
frosted over." 
He rubbed the frost clear and examined the engraved characters. 
To Arthur they looked like the footprints of a spider that had had one 
too many of whatever it is that spiders have on a night out, but Ford 
instantly recognized an early form of Galactic Eezeereed. 
"It says 'Golgafrincham Ark Fleet, Ship B, Hold Seven, Telephone 
Sanitizer Second Class' ʹ and a serial number." 
"A telephone sanitizer?" said Arthur, "a dead telephone sanitizer?" 
"Best kind." 
"But what's he doing here?" 
Ford peered through the top at the figure within. 
"Not a lot," he said, and suddenly flashed one of those grins of his 
which always made people think he'd been overdoing things recently 
and should try to get some rest. 
He scampered over to another sarcophagus. A moment's brisk 
towel work and he announced: 
"This one's a dead hairdresser. Hoopy " 
The next sarcophagus revealed itself to be the last resting place of 
an advertising account executive; the one after that contained a 
second`hand car salesman, third class. 
An inspection hatch let into the floor suddenly caught Ford's 
attention, and he squatted down to unfasten it, thrashing away at the 
clouds of freezing gas that threatened to envelope him. 
A thought occurred to Arthur. 
"If these are just coffins," he said, "Why are they kept so cold?" 
"Or, indeed, why are they kept anyway," said Ford tugging the 
hatchway open. The gas poured down through it. "Why in fact is 
anyone going to all the trouble and expense of carting five thousand 
dead bodies through space?" 
"Ten thousand," said Arthur, pointing at the archway through 
which the next chamber was dimly visible. 
Ford stuck his head down through the floor hatchway. He looked 
up again. 
"Fifteen thousand," he said, "there's another lot down there." 
"Fifteen million," said a voice. 
"That's a lot," said Ford, "A lot a lot." 
"Turn around slowly," barked the voice, "and put your hands up. 
Any other move and I blast you into tiny tiny bits." 
"Hello?" said Ford, turning round slowly, putting his hands up and 
not making any other move. 
"Why," said Arthur Dent, "isn't anyone ever pleased to see us?"
Standing silhouetted in the doorway through which they had 
entered the vault was the man who wasn't pleased to see them. His 
displeasure was communicated partly by the barking hectoring quality 
of his voice and partly by the viciousness with which he waved a long 
silver Kill`O`Zap gun at them. The designer of the gun had clearly not 
been instructed to beat about the bush. "Make it evil," he'd been told. 
"Make it totally clear that this gun has a right end and a wrong end. 
Make it totally clear to anyone standing at the wrong end that things 
are going badly for them. If that means sticking all sort of spikes and 
prongs and blackened bits all over it then so be it. This is not a gun for 
hanging over the fireplace or sticking in the umbrella stand, it is a gun 
for going out and making people miserable with." 
Ford and Arthur looked at the gun unhappily. 
The man with the gun moved from the door and circled round 
them. As he came into the light they could see his black and gold 
uniform on which the buttons were so highly polished that they shone 
with an intensity that would have made an approaching motorist flash 
his lights in annoyance. 
He gestured at the door. 
"Out," he said. People who can supply that amount of fire power 
don't need to supply verbs as well. Ford and Arthur went out, closely 
followed by the wrong end of the Kill`O`Zap gun and the buttons. 
Turning into the corridor they were jostled by twenty`four 
oncoming joggers, now showered and changed, who swept on past 
them into the vault. Arthur turned to watch them in confusion. 
"Move " screamed their captor. 
Arthur moved. 
Ford shrugged and moved. 
In the vault the joggers went to twenty`four empty sarcophagi 
along the side wall, opened them, climbed in, and fell into twenty`
four dreamless sleeps. 
Chapter 24
"Er, captain..." 
"Yes, Number One?" 
"Just heard a sort of report thingy from Number Two." 
"Oh, dear." 
High up in the bridge of the ship, the Captain stared out into the 
infinite reaches of space with mild irritation. From where he reclined 
beneath a wide domed bubble he could see before and above them 
the vast panorama of stars through which they were moving ʹ a 
panorama that had thinned out noticably during the course of the 
voyage. Turning and looking backwards, over the vast two`mile bulk 
of the ship he could see the far denser mass of stars behind them 
which seemed to form almost a solid band. This was the view through 
the Galactic centre from which they were travelling, and indeed had 
been travelling for years, at a speed that he couldn't quite remember 
at the moment, but he knew it was terribly fast. It was something 
approaching the speed of something or other, or was it three times 
the speed of something else? Jolly impressive anyway. He peered into 
the bright distance behind the ship, looking for something. He did this 
every few minutes or so, but never found what he was looking for. He 
didn't let it worry him though. The scientist chaps had been very 
insistent that everything was going to be perfectly alright providing 
nobody panicked and everybody got on and did their bit in an orderly 
fashion. 
He wasn't panicking. As far as he was concerned everything was 
going splendidly. He dabbed at his shoulder with a large frothy 
sponge. It crept back into his mind that he was feeling mildly irritated 
about something. Now what was all that about? A slight cough 
alerted him to the fact that the ship's first officer was still standing 
nearby. 
Nice chap, Number One. Not of the very brightest, had the odd 
spot of difficulty doing up his shoe laces, but jolly good officer 
material for all that. The Captain wasn't a man to kick a chap when he 
was bending over trying to do up his shoe laces, however long it took 
him. Not like that ghastly Number Two, strutting about all over the 
place, polishing his buttons, issuing reports every hour: "Ship's still 
moving, Captain." "Still on course, Captain." "Oxygen levels still being 
maintained, Captain." "Give it a miss," was the Captain's vote. Ah yes, 
that was the thing that had been irritating him. He peered down at 
Number One. 
"Yes, Captain, he was shouting something or other about having 
found some prisoners..." 
The Captain thought about this. Seemed pretty unlikely to him, but 
he wasn't one to stand in his officers' way. 
"Well, perhaps that'll keep him happy for a bit," he said, "He's 
always wanted some." 
Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent trudged onwards up the ship's 
apparently endless corridors. Number Two marched behind them 
barking the occasional order about not making any false moves or 
trying any funny stuff. They seemed to have passed at least a mile of 
continuous brown hessian wall weave. Finally they reached a large 
steel door which slid open when Number Two shouted at it. 
They entered. 
To the eyes of Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent, the most remarkable 
thing about the ship's bridge was not the fifty foot diameter 
hemispherical dome which covered it, and through which the dazzling 
display of stars shone down on them: to people who have eaten at 
the Restaurant at the End of the Universe, such wonders are 
commonplace. Nor was it the bewildering array of instruments that 
crowded the long circumferential wall around them. To Arthur this 
was exactly what spaceships were traditionally supposed to look like, 
and to Ford it looked thoroughly antiquated: it confirmed his 
suspicions that Disaster Area's stuntship had taken them back at least 
a million, if not two million, years before their own time. 
No, the thing that really caught them off balance was the bath. 
The bath stood on a six foot pedestal of rough hewn blue water 
crystal and was of a baroque monstrosity not often seen outside the 
Maximegalon Museum of Diseased Imaginings. An intestinal jumble of 
plumbing had been picked out in gold leaf rather than decently buried 
at midnight in an unmarked grave; the taps and shower attachment 
would have made a gargoyle jump. 
As the dominant centrepiece of a starship bridge it was terribly 
wrong, and it was with the embittered air of a man who knew this 
that Number Two approached it. 
"Captain, sir " he shouted through clenched teeth ʹ a difficult trick 
but he'd had years during which to perfect it. 
A large genial face and a genial foam covered arm popped up 
above the rim of the monstrous bath. 
"Ah, hello, Number Two," said the Captain, waving a cheery sponge, 
"having a nice day?" 
Number Two snapped even further to attention than he already 
was. 
"I have brought you the prisoners I located in freezer bay seven, 
sir " he yapped. 
Ford and Arthur coughed in confusion. 
"Er... hello," they said. 
The Captain beamed at them. So Number Two had really found 
some prisoners. Well, good for him, thought the Captain, nice to see a 
chap doing what he's best at. 
"Oh, hello there," he said to them, "Excuse me not getting up, 
having a quick bath. Well, jynnan tonnyx all round then. Look in the 
fridge Number one." 
"Certainly sir." 
It is a curious fact, and one to which no one knows quite how much 
importance to attach, that something like 85% of all known worlds in 
the Galaxy, be they primitive or highly advanced, have invented a 
drink called jynnan tonnyx, or gee`N'N`T'N`ix, or jinond`o`nicks, or any 
one of a thousand or more variations on the same phonetic theme. 
The drinks themselves are not the same, and vary between the 
Sivolvian "chinanto/mnigs" which is ordinary water server at slightly 
above room temperature, and the Gagrakackan "tzjin`anthony`ks" 
which kills cows at a hundred paces; and in fact the one common 
factor between all of them, beyond the fact that the names sound the 
same, is that they were all invented and named before the worlds 
concerned made contact with any other worlds. 
What can be made of this fact? It exists in total isolation. As far as 
any theory of structural linguistics is concerned it is right off the graph, 
and yet it persists. Old structural linguists get very angry when young 
structural linguists go on about it. Young structural linguists get 
deeply excited about it and stay up late at night convinced that they 
are very close to something of profound importance, and end up 
becoming old structural linguists before their time, getting very angry 
with the young ones. Structural linguistics is a bitterly divided and 
unhappy discipline, and a large number of its practitioners spend too 
many nights drowning their problems in Ouisghian Zodahs. 
Number Two stood before the Captain's bathtub trembling with 
frustration. 
"Don't you want to interrogate the prisoners sir?" he squealed. 
The Captain peered at him in bemusement. 
"Why on Golgafrincham should I want to do that?" he asked. 
"To get information out of them, sir  To find out why they came 
here " 
"Oh no, no, no," said the Captain, "I expect they just dropped in for 
a quick jynnan tonnyx, don't you?" 
"But sir, they're my prisoners  I must interrogate them " 
The Captain looked at them doubtfully. 
"Oh all right," he said, "if you must. Ask them what they want to 
drink." 
A hard cold gleam came into Number Two's eyes. He advanced 
slowly on Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent. 
"All right, you scum," he growled, "you vermin..." He jabbed Ford 
with the Kill`O`Zap gun. 
"Steady on, Number Two," admonished the Captain gently. 
"What do you want to drink?  " Number Two screamed. 
"Well the jynnan tonnyx sounds very nice to me," said Ford, "What 
about you Arthur?" 
Arthur blinked. 
"What? Oh, er, yes," he said. 
"With ice or without?" bellowed Number Two. 
"Oh, with please," said Ford. 
"Lemon??  " 
"Yes please," said Ford, "and do you have any of those little biscuits? 
You know, the cheesy ones?" 
"I'm asking the questions    " howled Number Two, his body 
quaking with apoplectic fury. 
"Er, Number Two..." said the Captain softly. 
"Sir? " 
"Push off, would you, there's a good chap. I'm trying to have a 
relaxing bath." 
Number Two's eyes narrowed and became what are known in the 
Shouting and Killing People trade as cold slits, the idea presumably 
being to give your opponent the impression that you have lost your 
glasses or are having difficulty keeping awake. Why this is frightening 
is an, as yet, unresolved problem. 
He advanced on the captain, his (Number Two's) mouth a thin hard 
line. Again, tricky to know why this is understood as fighting 
behaviour. If, whilst wandering through the jungle of Traal, you were 
suddenly to come upon the fabled Ravenous Bugblatter Beast, you 
would have reason to be grateful if its mouth was a thin hard line 
rather than, as it usually is, a gaping mass of slavering fangs. 
"May I remind you sir," hissed Number Two at the Captain, "that 
you have now been in that bath for over three years? " This final shot 
delivered, Number Two spun on his heel and stalked off to a corner to 
practise darting eye movements in the mirror. 
The Captain squirmed in his bath. He gave Ford Prefect a lame 
smile. 
"Well you need to relax a lot in a job like mine," he said. 
Ford slowly lowered his hands. It provoked no reaction. Arthur 
lowered his. 
Treading very slowly and carefully, Ford moved over to the bath 
pedestal. He patted it. 
"Nice," he lied. 
He wondered if it was safe to grin. Very slowly and carefully, he 
grinned. It was safe. 
"Er..." he said to the Captain. 
"Yes?" said the Captain. 
"I wonder," said Ford, "could I ask you actually what your job is in 
fact?" 
A hand tapped him on the shoulder. He span round. 
It was the first officer. 
"Your drinks," he said. 
"Ah, thank you," said Ford. He and Arthur took their jynnan tonnyx. 
Arthur sipped his, and was surprised to discover it tasted very like a 
whisky and soda. 
"I mean, I couldn't help noticing," said Ford, also taking a sip, "the 
bodies. In the hold." 
"Bodies?" said the Captain in surprise. 
Ford paused and thought to himself. Never take anything for 
granted, he thought. Could it be that the Captain doesn't know he's 
got fifteen million dead bodies on his ship? 
The Captain was nodding cheerfully at him. He also appeared to be 
playing with a rubber duck. 
Ford looked around. Number Two was staring at him in the mirror, 
but only for an instant: his eyes were constantly on the move. The 
first officer was just standing there holding the drinks tray and smiling 
benignly. 
"Bodies?" said the Captain again. 
Ford licked his lips. 
"Yes," he said, "All those dead telephone sanitizers and account 
executives, you know, down in the hold." 
The Captain stared at him. Suddenly he threw back his head and 
laughed. 
"Oh they're not dead," he said, "Good Lord no, no they're frozen. 
They're going to be revived." 
Ford did something he very rarely did. He blinked. 
Arthur seemed to come out of a trance. 
"You mean you've got a hold full of frozen hairdressers?" he said. 
"Oh yes," said the Captain, "Millions of them. Hairdressers, tired TV 
producers, insurance salesmen, personnel officers, security guards, 
public relations executives, management consultants, you name them. 
We're going to colonize another planet." 
Ford wobbled very slightly. 
"Exciting isn't it?" said the Captain. 
"What, with that lot?" said Arthur. 
"Ah, now don't misunderstand me," said the Captain, "we're just 
one of the ships in the Ark Fleet. We're the 'B' Ark you see. Sorry, 
could I just ask you to run a bit more hot water for me?" 
Arthur obliged, and a cascade of pink frothy water swirled around 
the bath. The Captain let out a sigh of pleasure. 
"Thank you so much my dear fellow. Do help yourselves to more 
drinks of course." 
Ford tossed down his drink, took the bottle from the first officer's 
tray and refilled his glass to the top. 
"What," he said, "is a 'B' Ark?" 
"This is," said the Captain, and swished the foamy water around 
joyfully with the duck. 
"Yes," said Ford, "but..." 
"Well what happened you see was," said the Captain, "our planet, 
the world from which we have come, was, so to speak, doomed." 
"Doomed?" 
"Oh yes. So what everyone thought was, let's pack the whole 
population into some giant spaceships and go and settle on another 
planet." 
Having told this much of his story, he settled back with a satisfied 
grunt. 
"You mean a less doomed one?" promoted Arthur. 
"What did you say dear fellow?" 
"A less doomed planet. You were going to settle on." 
"Are going to settle on, yes. So it was decided to build three ships, 
you see, three Arks in Space, and... I'm not boring you am I?" 
"No, no," said Ford firmly, "it's fascinating." 
"You know it's delightful," reflected the Captain, "to have someone 
else to talk to for a change." 
Number Two's eyes darted feverishly about the room again and 
then settled back on the mirror, like a pair of flies briefly distracted 
from their favourite prey of months old meat. 
"Trouble with a long journey like this," continued the Captain, "is
that you end up just talking to yourself a lot, which gets terribly 
boring because half the time you know what you're going to say 
next." 
"Only half the time?" asked Arthur in surprise. 
The Captain thought for a moment. 
"Yes, about half I'd say. Anyway ʹ where's the soap?" He fished 
around and found it. 
"Yes, so anyway," he resumed, "the idea was that into the first ship, 
the 'A' ship, would go all the brilliant leaders, the scientists, the great 
artists, you know, all the achievers; and into the third, or 'C' ship, 
would go all the people who did the actual work, who made things 
and did things, and then into the 'B' ship ʹ that's us ʹ would go 
everyone else, the middlemen you see." 
He smiled happily at them. 
"And we were sent off first," he concluded, and hummed a little 
bathing tune. 
The little bathing tune, which had been composed for him by one 
of his world's most exciting and prolific jingle writer (who was 
currently asleep in hold thirty`six some nine hundred yards behind 
them) covered what would otherwise have been an awkward 
moment of silence. Ford and Arthur shuffled their feet and furiously 
avoided each other's eyes. 
"Er..." said Arthur after a moment, "what exactly was it that was 
wrong with your planet then?" 
"Oh, it was doomed, as I said," said the Captain, "Apparently it was 
going to crash into the sun or something. Or maybe it was that the 
moon was going to crash into us. Something of the kind. Absolutely 
terrifying prospect whatever it was." 
"Oh," said the first officer suddenly, "I thought it was that the 
planet was going to be invaded by a gigantic swarm of twelve foot 
piranha bees. Wasn't that it?" 
Number Two span around, eyes ablaze with a cold hard light that 
only comes with the amount of practise he was prepared to put in. 
"That's not what I was told " he hissed, "My commanding officer 
told me that the entire planet was in imminent danger of being eaten 
by an enormous mutant star goat " 
"Oh really..." said Ford Prefect. 
"Yes  A monstrous creature from the pit of hell with scything teeth 
ten thousand miles long, breath that would boil oceans, claws that 
could tear continents from their roots, a thousand eyes that burned 
like the sun, slavering jaws a million miles across, a monster such as 
you have never... never... ever..." 
"And they made sure they sent you lot off first did they?" inquired 
Arthur. 
"Oh yes," said the Captain, "well everyone said, very nicely I 
thought, that it was very important for morale to feel that they would 
be arriving on a planet where they could be sure of a good haircut 
and where the phones were clean." 
"Oh yes," agreed Ford, "I can see that would be very important. 
And the other ships, er... they followed on after you did they?" 
For a moment the Captain did not answer. He twisted round in his 
bath and gazed backwards over the huge bulk of the ship towards the 
bright galactic centre. He squinted into the inconceivable distance. 
"Ah. Well it's funny you should say that," he said and allowed 
himself a slight frown at Ford Prefect, "because curiously enough we 
haven't heard a peep out of them since we left five years ago... but 
they must be behind us somewhere." 
He peered off into the distance again. 
Ford peered with him and gave a thoughtful frown. 
"Unless of course," he said softly, "they were eaten by the goat..." 
"Ah yes..." said the Captain with a slight hesitancy creeping into his 
voice, "the goat..." His eyes passed over the solid shapes of the 
instruments and computers that lined the bridge. They winked away 
innocently at him. He stared out at the stars, but none of them said a 
word. He glanced at his first and second officers, but they seemed lost 
in their own thoughts for a moment. He glanced at Ford Prefect who 
raised his eyebrows at him. 
"It's a funny thing you know," said the Captain at last, "but now 
that I actually come to tell the story to someone else... I mean does it 
strike you as odd Number Two?" 
"Errrrrrrrrrrr..." said Number Two. 
"Well," said Ford, "I can see that you've got a lot of things you're 
going to talk about, so, thanks for the drinks, and if you could sort of 
drop us off at the nearest convenient planet..." 
"Ah, well that's a little difficult you see," said the Captain, "because 
our trajectory thingy was preset before we left Golgafrincham, I think 
partly because I'm not very good with figures..." 
"You mean we're stuck here on this ship?" exclaimed Ford 
suddenly losing patience with the whole charade, "When are you 
meant to be reaching this planet you're meant to be colonizing?" 
"Oh, we're nearly there I think," said the Captain, "any second now. 
It's probably time I was getting out of this bath in fact. Oh, I don't 
know though, why stop just when I'm enjoying it?" 
"So we're actually going to land in a minute?" 
"Well not so much land, in fact, not actually land as such, no... er..." 
"What are you talking about?" said Ford sharply. 
"Well," said the Captain, picking his way through the words 
carefully, "I think as far as I can remember we were programmed to 
crash on it." 
"Crash?" shouted Ford and Arthur. 
"Er, yes," said the Captain, "yes, it's all part of the plan I think. 
There was a terribly good reason for it which I can't quite remember 
at the moment. It was something to with... er..." 
Ford exploded. 
"You're a load of useless bloody loonies " he shouted. 
"Ah yes, that was it," beamed the Captain, "that was the reason." 
Chapter 25
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has this to say about the 
planet of Golgafrincham: It is a planet with an ancient and mysterious 
history, rich in legend, red, and occasionally green with the blood of 
those who sought in times gone by to conquer her; a land of parched 
and barren landscapes, of sweet and sultry air heady with the scent of 
the perfumed springs that trickle over its hot and dusty rocks and 
nourish the dark and musty lichens beneath; a land of fevered brows 
and intoxicated imaginings, particularly amongst those who taste the 
lichens; a land also of cool and shaded thoughts amongst those who 
have learnt to forswear the lichens and find a tree to sit beneath; a 
land also of steel and blood and heroism; a land of the body and of 
the spirit. This was its history. 
And in all this ancient and mysterious history, the most mysterious 
figures of all were without doubt those of the Great Circling Poets of 
Arium. These Circling Poets used to live in remote mountain passes 
where they would lie in wait for small bands of unwary travellers, 
circle round them, and throw rocks at them. 
And when the travellers cried out, saying why didn't they go away 
and get on with writing some poems instead of pestering people with 
all this rock`throwing business, they would suddenly stop, and then 
break into one of the seven hundred and ninety`four great Song 
Cycles of Vassilian. These songs were all of extraordinary beauty, and 
even more extraordinary length, and all fell into exactly the same 
pattern. 
The first part of each song would tell how there once went forth 
from the City of Vassilian a party of five sage princes with four horses. 
The princes, who are of course brave, noble and wise, travel widely in 
distant lands, fought giant ogres, pursue exotic philosophies, take tea 
with weird gods and rescue beautiful monsters from ravening 
princesses before finally announcing that they have achieved 
enlightenment and that their wanderings are therefore accomplished. 
The second, and much longer, part of each song would then tell of 
all their bickerings about which one of them is going to have to walk 
back. 
All this lay in the planet's remote past. It was, however, a 
descendant of one of these eccentric poets who invented the 
spurious tales of impending doom which enabled the people of 
Golgafrincham to rid themselves of an entire useless third of their 
population. The other two`thirds stayed firmly at home and lived full, 
rich and happy lives until they were all suddenly wiped out by a 
virulent disease contracted from a dirty telephone. 
Chapter 26
That night the ship crash`landed on to an utterly insignificant little 
green`blue planet which circled a small unregarded yellow sun in the 
uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the Western spiral 
arm of the Galaxy.
In the hours preceding the crash Ford Prefect had fought furiously 
but in vain to unlock the controls of the ship from their pre`ordained 
flight path. It had quickly become apparent to him that the ship had 
been programmed to convey its payload safely, in uncomfortably, to 
its new home but to cripple itself beyond repair in the process. 
Its screaming, blazing descent through the atmosphere had 
stripped away most of its superstructure and outer shielding, and its 
final inglorious bellyflop into a murky swamp had left its crew only a 
few hours of darkness during which to revive and offload its deep`
frozen and unwanted cargo for the ship began to settle almost at 
once, slowly upending its gigantic bulk in the stagnant slime. Once or 
twice during the night it was starkly silhouetted against the sky as 
burning meteors ʹ the detritus of its descent ʹ flashed across the sky. 
In the grey pre`dawn light it let out an obscene roaring gurgle and 
sank for ever into the stinking depths. 
When the sun came up that morning it shed its thin watery light 
over a vast area heaving with wailing hairdressers, public relations 
executives, opinion pollsters and the rest, all clawing their way 
desperately to dry land. 
A less strong minded sun would probably have gone straight back 
down again, but it continued to climb its way through the sky and 
after a while the influence of its warming rays began to have some 
restoring effect on the feebly struggling creatures. 
Countless numbers had, unsurprisingly, been lost to the swamp in 
the night, and millions more had been sucked down with the ship, but 
those that survived still numbered hundreds of thousands and as the 
day wore on they crawled out over the surrounding countryside, each 
looking for a few square feet of solid ground on which to collapse and 
recover from their nightmare ordeal. 
Two figures moved further afield. 
From a nearby hillside Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent watched the 
horror of which they could not feel a part. 
"Filthy dirty trick to pull," muttered Arthur. 
Ford scraped a stick along the ground and shrugged. 
"An imaginative solution to a problem I'd have thought," he said. 
"Why can't people just learn to live together in peace and 
harmony?" said Arthur. 
Ford gave a loud, very hollow laugh. 
"Forty`two " he said with a malicious grin, "No, doesn't work. 
Never mind." 
Arthur looked at him as if he'd gone mad and, seeing nothing to 
indicate the contrary, realized that it would be perfectly reasonable to 
assume that this had in fact happened. 
"What do you think will happen to them all?" he said after a while. 
"In an infinite Universe anything can happen," said Ford, "Even 
survival. Strange but true." 
A curious look came into his eyes as they passed over the 
landscape and then settles again on the scene of misery below them. 
"I think they'll manage for a while," he said. 
Arthur looked up sharply. 
"Why do you say that?" he said. 
Ford shrugged. 
"Just a hunch," he said, and refused to be drawn to any further 
questions. 
"Look," he said suddenly. 
Arthur followed his pointing finger. Down amongst the sprawling 
masses a figure was moving ʹ or perhaps lurching would be a more 
accurate description. He appeared to be carrying something on his 
shoulder. As he lurched from prostrate form to prostrate form he 
seemed to wave whatever the something was at them in a drunken 
fashion. After a while he gave up the struggle and collapsed in a heap. 
Arthur had no idea what this was meant to mean to him. 
"Movie camera," said Ford. "Recording the historic movement." 
"Well, I don't know about you," said Ford again after a moment, 
"but I'm off." 
He sat a while in silence. 
After a while this seemed to require comment. 
"Er, when you say you're off, what do you mean exactly?" said 
Arthur. 
"Good question," said Ford, "I'm getting total silence." 
Looking over his shoulder Arthur saw that he was twiddling with 
knobs on a small box. Ford had already introduced this box as a Sub`
Etha Sens`O`Matic, but Arthur had merely nodded absently and not 
pursued the matter. In his mind the Universe still divided into two 
parts ʹ the Earth, and everything else. The Earth having been 
demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass meant that 
this view of things was a little lopsided, but Arthur tended to cling to 
that lopsidedness as being his last remaining contact with his home. 
Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matics belonged firmly in the "everything else" 
category. 
"Not a sausage," said Ford, shaking the thing. 
Sausage, thought Arthur to himself as he gazed listlessly at the 
primitive world about him, what I wouldn't give for a good Earth 
sausage. 
"Would you believe," said Ford in exasperation, "that there are no 
transmissions of any kind within light years of this benighted tip? Are 
you listening to me?" 
"What?" said Arthur. 
"We're in trouble," said Ford. 
"Oh," said Arthur. This sounded like month`old news to him. 
"Until we pick up anything on this machine," said Ford, "our 
chances of getting off this planet are zero. It may be some freak 
standing wave effect in the planet's magnetic field ʹ in which case we 
just travel round and round till we find a clear reception area. 
Coming?" 
He picked up his gear and strode off. 
Arthur looked down the hill. The man with the movie camera had 
struggled back up to his feet just in time to film one of his colleagues 
collapsing. 
Arthur picked a blade of grass and strode off after Ford. 
Chapter 27
"I trust you had a pleasant meal?" said Zarniwoop to Zaphod and 
Trillian as they rematerialized on the bridge of the starship Heart of 
Gold and lay panting on the floor. 
Zaphod opened some eyes and glowered at him. 
"You," he spat. He staggered to his feet and stomped off to find a 
chair to slump into. He found one and slumped into it. 
"I have programmed the computer with the Improbability 
Coordinates pertinent to our journey," said Zarniwoop, "we will arrive 
there very shortly. Meanwhile, why don't you relax and prepare 
yourself for the meeting?" 
Zaphod said nothing. He got up again and marched over to a small 
cabinet from which he pulled a bottle of old Janx spirit. He took a long 
pull at it. 
"And when this is all done," said Zaphod savagely, "it's done, alright? 
I'm free to go and do what the hell I like and lie on beaches and 
stuff?" 
"It depends what transpires from the meeting," said Zarniwoop. 
"Zaphod, who is this man?" said Trillian shakily, wobbling to her 
feet, "What's he doing here? Why's he on our ship?" 
"He's a very stupid man," said Zaphod, "who wants to meet the 
man who rules the Universe." 
"Ah," said Trillian taking the bottle from Zaphod and helping herself, 
"a social climber." 
Chapter 28
The major problem ʹ one of the major problems, for there are 
several ʹ one of the many major problems with governing people is 
that of whom you get to do it; or rather of who manages to get 
people to let them do it to them. 
To summarize: it is a well known fact, that those people who most 
want to rule people are, ipso facto, those least suited to do it. To 
summarize the summary: anyone who is capable of getting 
themselves made President should on no account be allowed to do 
the job. To summarize the summary of the summary: people are a 
problem. 
And so this is the situation we find: a succession of Galactic 
Presidents who so much enjoy the fun and palaver of being in power 
that they very rarely notice that they're not. 
And somewhere in the shadows behind them ʹ who? 
Who can possibly rule if no one who wants to do it can be allowed 
to? 
Chapter 29
On a small obscure world somewhere in the middle of nowhere in 
particular ʹ nowhere, that is, that could ever be found, since it is 
protected by a vast field of unprobability to which only six men in this 
galaxy have a key ʹ it was raining. 
It was bucketing down, and had been for hours. It beat the top of 
the sea into a mist, it pounded the trees, it churned and slopped a 
stretch of scrubby land near the sea into a mudbath. 
The rain pelted and danced on the corrugated iron roof of the small 
shack that stood in the middle of this patch of scrubby land. It 
obliterated the small rough pathway that led from the shack down to 
the seashore and smashed apart the neat piles of interesting shells 
which had been placed there. 
The noise of the rain on the roof of the shack was deafening within, 
but went largely unnoticed by its occupant, whose attention was 
otherwise engaged. 
He was a tall shambling man with rough straw`coloured hair that 
was damp from the leaking roof. His clothes were shabby, his back 
was hunched, and his eyes, though open, seemed closed. 
In his shack was an old beaten`up armchair, an old scratched table, 
an old mattress, some cushions and a stove that was small but warm. 
There was also an old and slightly weatherbeaten cat, and this was 
currently the focus of the man's attention. He bent his shambling 
form over it. 
"Pussy, pussy, pussy," he said, "coochicoochicoochicoo... pussy 
want his fish? Nice piece of fish... pussy want it?" 
The cat seemed undecided on the matter. It pawed rather 
condescendingly at the piece of fish the man was holding out, and 
then got distracted by a piece of dust on the floor. 
"Pussy not eat his fish, pussy get thin and waste away, I think," said 
the man. Doubt crept into his voice. 
"I imagine this is what will happen," he said, "but how can I tell?" 
He proffered the fish again. 
"Pussy think," he said, "eat fish or not eat fish. I think it is better if I 
don't get involved." He sighed. 
"I think fish is nice, but then I think that rain is wet, so who am I to 
judge?" 
He left the fish on the floor for the cat, and retired to his seat. 
"Ah, I seem to see you eating it," he said at last, as the cat 
exhausted the entertainment possibilities of the speck of dust and 
pounced on to the fish. 
"I like it when I see you eat the fish," said the man, "because in my 
mind you will waste away if you don't." 
He picked up from the table a piece of paper and the stub of a 
pencil. He held one in one hand and the other in the other, and 
experimented with the different ways of bringing them together. He 
tried holding the pencil under the paper, then over the paper, then 
next to the paper. He tried wrapping the paper round the pencil, he 
tried rubbing the stubby end of the pencil against the paper and then 
he tried rubbing the sharp end of the pencil against the paper. It 
made a mark, and he was delighted with the discovery, as he was 
every day. He picked up another piece of paper from the table. This 
had a crossword on it. He studied it briefly and filled in a couple of 
clues before losing interest. 
He tried sitting on one of his hands and was intrigued by the feel of 
the bones of his hip. 
"Fish come from far away," he said, "or so I'm told. Or so I imagine 
I'm told. When the men come, or when in my mind the men come in 
their six black ships, do they come in your mind too? What do you see 
pussy?" 
He looked at the cat, which was more concerned with getting the 
fish down as rapidly as possible than it was with these speculations. 
"And when I hear their questions, do you hear questions? What do 
their voices mean to you? Perhaps you just think they're singing songs 
to you." He reflected on this, and saw the flaw in the supposition. 
"Perhaps they are singing songs to you," he said, "and I just think 
they're asking me questions." 
He paused again. Sometimes he would pause for days, just to see 
what it was like. 
"Do you think they came today?" he said, "I do. There's mud on the 
floor, cigarettes and whisky on the table, fish on a plate for you and a 
memory of them in my mind. Hardly conclusive evidence I know, but 
then all evidence is circumstantial. And look what else they've left 
me." 
He reached over to the table and pulled some things off it. 
"Crosswords, dictionaries, and a calculator." 
He played with the calculator for an hour, whilst the cat went to 
sleep and the rain outside continued to pour. Eventually he put the 
calculator aside. 
"I think I must be right in thinking they ask me questions," he said, 
"To come all that way and leave all these things for the privilege of 
singing songs to you would be very strange behaviour. Or so it seems 
to me. Who can tell, who can tell." 
From the table he picked up a cigarette and lit it with a spill from 
the stove. He inhaled deeply and sat back. 
"I think I saw another ship in the sky today," he said at last. "A big 
white one. I've never seen a big white one, just the six black ones. 
And the six green ones. And the others who say they come from so far 
away. Never a big white one. Perhaps six small black ones can look 
like one big white one at certain times. Perhaps I would like a glass of 
whisky. Yes, that seems more likely." 
He stood up and found a glass that was lying on the floor by the 
mattress. He poured in a measure from his whisky bottle. He sat again. 
"Perhaps some other people are coming to see me," he said. 
A hundred yards away, pelted by the torrential rain, lay the Heart 
of Gold. 
Its hatchway opened, and three figures emerged, huddling into 
themselves to keep the rain off their faces. 
"In there?" shouted Trillian above the noise of the rain. 
"Yes," said Zarniwoop. 
"That shack?" 
"Yes." 
"Weird," said Zaphod. 
"But it's in the middle of nowhere," said Trillian, "we must have 
come to the wrong place. You can't rule the Universe from a shack." 
They hurried through the pouring rain, and arrived, wet through, at 
the door. They knocked. They shivered. 
The door opened. 
"Hello?" said the man. 
"Ah, excuse me," said Zarniwoop, "I have reason to believe..." 
"Do you rule the Universe?" said Zaphod. 
The man smiled at him. 
"I try not to," he said, "Are you wet?" 
Zaphod looked at him in astonishment. 
"Wet?" he cried, "Doesn't it look as if we're wet?" 
"That's how it looks to me," said the man, "but how you feel about 
it might be an altogether different matter. If you feel warmth makes 
you dry, you'd better come in." 
They went in. 
They looked around the tiny shack, Zarniwoop with slight distaste, 
Trillian with interest, Zaphod with delight. 
"Hey, er..." said Zaphod, "what's your name?" 
The man looked at them doubtfully. 
"I don't know. Why, do you think I should have one? It seems very 
odd to give a bundle of vague sensory perceptions a name." 
He invited Trillian to sit in the chair. He sat on the edge of the chair, 
Zarniwoop leaned stiffly against the table and Zaphod lay on the 
mattress. 
"Wowee " said Zaphod, "the seat of power " He tickled the cat. 
"Listen," said Zarniwoop, "I must ask you some questions." 
"Alright," said the man kindly, "you can sing to my cat if you like." 
"Would he like that?" asked Zaphod. 
"You'd better ask him," said the man. 
"Does he talk?" said Zaphod. 
"I have no memory of him talking," said the man, "but I am very 
unreliable." 
Zarniwoop pulled some notes out of a pocket. 
"Now," he said, "you do rule the Universe, do you?" 
"How can I tell?" said the man. 
Zarniwoop ticked off a note on the paper. 
"How long have you been doing this?" 
"Ah," said the man, "this is a question about the past is it?" 
Zarniwoop looked at him in puzzlement. This wasn't exactly what 
he had been expecting. 
"Yes," he said. 
"How can I tell," said the man, "that the past isn't a fiction designed 
to account for the discrepancy between my immediate physical 
sensations and my state of mind?" 
Zarniwoop stared at him. The steam began to rise from his sodden 
clothes. 
"So you answer all questions like this?" he said. 
The man answered quickly. 
"I say what it occurs to me to say when I think I hear people say 
things. More I cannot say." 
Zaphod laughed happily. 
"I'll drink to that," he said and pulled out the bottle of Janx spirit. 
He leaped up and handed the bottle to the ruler of the Universe, who 
took it with pleasure. 
"Good on you, great ruler," he said, "tell it like it is." 
"No, listen to me," said Zarniwoop, "people come to you do they? 
In ships..." 
"I think so," said the man. He handed the bottle to Trillian. 
"And they ask you," said Zarniwoop, "to take decisions for them? 
About people's lives, about worlds, about economies, about wars, 
about everything going on out there in the Universe?" 
"Out there?" said the man, "out where?" 
"Out there " said Zarniwoop pointing at the door. 
"How can you tell there's anything out there," said the man politely, 
"the door's closed." 
The rain continued to pound the roof. Inside the shack it was warm. 
"But you know there's a whole Universe out there " cried 
Zarniwoop. "You can't dodge your responsibilities by saying they don't 
exist " 
The ruler of the Universe thought for a long while whilst Zarniwoop 
quivered with anger. 
"You're very sure of your facts," he said at last, "I couldn't trust the 
thinking of a man who takes the Universe ʹ if there is one ʹ for 
granted." 
Zarniwoop still quivered, but was silent. 
"I only decide about my Universe," continued the man quietly. "My 
Universe is my eyes and my ears. Anything else is hearsay." 
"But don't you believe in anything?" 
The man shrugged and picked up his cat. 
"I don't understand what you mean," he said. 
"You don't understand that what you decide in this shack of yours 
affects the lives and fates of millions of people? This is all monstrously 
wrong " 
"I don't know. I've never met all these people you speak of. And 
neither, I suspect, have you. They only exist in words we hear. It is 
folly to say you know what is happening to other people. Only they 
know, if they exist. They have their own Universes of their own eyes 
and ears." 
Trillian said: 
"I think I'm just popping outside for a moment." 
She left and walked into the rain. 
"Do you believe other people exist?" insisted Zarniwoop. 
"I have no opinion. How can I say?" 
"I'd better see what's up with Trillian," said Zaphod and slipped out. 
Outside, he said to her: 
"I think the Universe is in pretty good hands, yeah?" 
"Very good," said Trillian. They walked off into the rain. 
Inside, Zarniwoop continued. 
"But don't you understand that people live or die on your word?" 
The ruler of the Universe waited for as long as he could. When he 
heard the faint sound of the ship's engines starting he spoke to cover 
it. 
"It's nothing to do with me," he said, "I am not involved with 
people. The Lord knows I am not a cruel man." 
"Ah " barked Zarniwoop, "you say 'The Lord'. You believe in 
something " 
"My cat," said the man benignly, picking it up and stroking it, "I call 
him The Lord. I am kind to him." 
"Alright," said Zarniwoop, pressing home his point, "How do you 
know he exists? How do you know he knows you to be kind, or enjoys 
what he thinks of as your kindness?" 
"I don't," said the man with a smile, "I have no idea. It merely 
pleases me to behave in a certain way to what appears to be a cat. Do 
you behave any differently? Please, I think I am tired." 
Zarniwoop heaved a thoroughly dissatisfied sigh and looked about. 
"Where are the other two?" he said suddenly. 
"What other two?" said the ruler of the Universe, settling back into 
his chair and refilling his whisky glass. 
"Beeblebrox and the girl  The two who were here " 
"I remember no one. The past is a fiction to account for..." 
"Stuff it," snapped Zarniwoop and ran out into the rain. There was 
no ship. The rain continued to churn the mud. There was no sign to 
show where the ship had been. He hollered into the rain. He turned 
and ran back to the shack and found it locked. 
The ruler of the Universe dozed lightly in his chair. After a while he 
played with the pencil and the paper again and was delighted when 
he discovered how to make a mark with the one on the other. Various 
noises continued outside, but he didn't know whether they were real 
or not. He then talked to his table for a week to see how it would 
react. 
Chapter 30
The stars came out that night, dazzling in their brilliance and clarity. 
Ford and Arthur had walked more miles than they had any means of 
judging and finally stopped to rest. The night was cool and balmy, the 
air pure, the Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matic totally silent. 
A wonderful stillness hung over the world, a magical calm which 
combined with the soft fragrances of the woods, the quiet chatter of 
insects and the brilliant light of the stars to soothe their jangled spirits. 
Even Ford Prefect, who had seen more worlds than he could count on 
a long afternoon, was moved to wonder if this was the most beautiful 
he had ever seen. All that day they had passed through rolling green 
hills and valleys, richly covered with grasses, wild scented flowers and 
tall thickly leaved trees, the sun had warmed them, light breezes had 
kept them cool, and Ford Prefect had checked his Sub`Etha Sens`O`
Matic at less and less frequent intervals, and had exhibited less and 
less annoyance at its continued silence. He was beginning to think he 
liked it here. 
Cool though the night air was they slept soundly and comfortably 
in the open and awoke a few hours later with the light dewfall feeling 
refreshed but hungry. Ford had stuffed some small rolls into his 
satchel at Milliways and they breakfasted off those before moving on. 
So far they had wandered purely at random, but now they struck 
out firmly eastwards, feeling that if they were going to explore this 
world they should have some clear idea of where they had come from 
and where they were going. 
Shortly before noon they had their first indication that the world 
they had landed on was not an uninhabited one: a half glimpsed face 
amongst the trees, watching them. It vanished at the moment they 
both saw it, but the image they were both left with was of a 
humanoid creature, curious to see them but not alarmed. Half an 
hour later they glimpsed another such face, and ten minutes after 
that another. 
A minute later they stumbled into a wide clearing and stopped 
short. 
Before them in the middle of the clearing stood a group of about 
two dozen men and women. They stood still and quiet facing Ford 
and Arthur. Around some of the women huddled some small children 
and behind the group was a ramshackle array of small dwellings made 
of mud and branches. 
Ford and Arthur held their breath. 
The tallest of the men stood a little over five feet high, they all 
stooped forward slightly, had longish arms and lowish foreheads, and 
clear bright eyes with which they stared intently at the strangers. 
Seeing that they carried no weapons and made no move towards 
them, Ford and Arthur relaxed slightly. 
For a while the two groups simply stared at each other, neither side 
making any move. The natives seemed puzzled by the intruders, and 
whilst they showed no sign of aggression they were quite clearly not 
issuing any invitations. 
For a full two minutes nothing continued to happen. 
After two minutes Ford decided it was time something happened. 
"Hello," he said. 
The women drew their children slightly closer to them. 
The men made hardly any discernible move and yet their whole 
disposition made it clear that the greeting was not welcome ʹ it was 
not resented in any great degree, it was just not welcome. 
One of the men, who had been standing slightly forward of the rest 
of the group and who might therefore have been their leader, 
stepped forward. His face was quiet and calm, almost serene. 
"Ugghhhuuggghhhrrrr uh uh ruh uurgh," he said quietly. 
This caught Arthur by surprise. He had grown so used to receiving 
an instantaneous and unconscious translation of everything he heard 
via the Babel Fish lodged in his ear that he had ceased to be aware of 
it, and he was only reminded of its presence now by the fact that it 
didn't seem to be working. Vague shadows of meaning had flickered 
at the back of his mind, but there was nothing he could get any firm 
grasp on. He guessed, correctly as it happens, that these people had 
as yet evolved no more than the barest rudiments of language, and 
that the Babel Fish was therefore powerless to help. He glanced at 
Ford, who was infinitely more experienced in these matters. 
"I think," said Ford out of the corner of his mouth, "he's asking us if 
we'd mind walking on round the edge of the village." 
A moment later, a gesture from the man`creature seemed to 
confirm this. 
"Ruurgggghhhh urrgggh; urgh urgh (uh ruh) rruurruuh ug," 
continued the man`creature. 
"The general gist," said Ford, "as far as I can make out, is that we 
are welcome to continue our journey in any way we like, but if we 
would walk round his village rather than through it would make them 
all very happy." 
"So what do we do?" 
"I think we make them happy," said Ford. 
Slowly and watchfully they walked round the perimeter of the 
clearing. This seemed to go down very well with the natives who 
bowed to them very slightly and then went about their business. 
Ford and Arthur continued their journey through the wood. A few 
hundred yards past the clearing they suddenly came upon a small pile 
of fruit lying in their path ʹ berries that looked remarkably like 
raspberries and blackberries, and pulpy, green skinned fruit that 
looked remarkably like pears. 
So far they had steered clear of the fruit and berries they had seen, 
though the trees and bushed were laden with them. 
"Look at it this way," Ford Prefect had said, "fruit and berries on 
strange planets either make you live or make you die. Therefore the 
point at which to start toying with them is when you're going to die if 
you don't. That way you stay ahead. The secret of healthy hitch`hiking 
is to eat junk food." 
They looked at the pile that lay in their path with suspicion. It 
looked so good it made them almost dizzy with hunger. 
"Look at it this way," said Ford, "er..." 
"Yes?" said Arthur. 
"I'm trying to think of a way of looking at it which means we get to 
eat it," said Ford. 
The leaf`dappled sun gleamed on the pulp skins of the things which 
looked like pears. The things which looked like raspberries and 
strawberries were fatter and riper than any Arthur had ever seen, 
even in ice cream commercials. 
"Why don't we eat them and think about it afterwards?" he said. 
"Maybe that's what they want us to do." 
"Alright, look at it this way..." 
"Sounds good so far." 
"It's there for us to eat. Either it's good or it's bad, either they want 
to feed us or to poison us. If it's poisonous and we don't eat it they'll 
just attack us some other way. If we don't eat, we lose out either 
way." 
"I like the way you're thinking," said Ford, "Now eat one." 
Hesitantly, Arthur picked up one of those things that looked like 
pears. 
"I always thought that about the Garden of Eden story," said Ford. 
"Eh?" 
"Garden of Eden. Tree. Apple. That bit, remember?" 
"Yes of course I do." 
"Your God person puts an apple tree in the middle of a garden and 
says do what you like guys, oh, but don't eat the apple. Surprise 
surprise, they eat it and he leaps out from behind a bush shouting 
'Gotcha'. It wouldn't have made any difference if they hadn't eaten 
it." 
"Why not?" 
"Because if you're dealing with somebody who has the sort of 
mentality which likes leaving hats on the pavement with bricks under 
them you know perfectly well they won't give up. They'll get you in 
the end." 
"What are you talking about?" 
"Never mind, eat the fruit." 
"You know, this place almost looks like the Garden of Eden." 
"Eat the fruit." 
"Sounds quite like it too." 
Arthur took a bite from the thing which looked like a pear. 
"It's a pear," he said. 
A few moments later, when they had eaten the lot, Ford Prefect 
turned round and called out. 
"Thank you. Thank you very much," he called, "you're very kind." 
They went on their way. 
For the next fifty miles of their journey eastward they kept on 
finding the occasional gift of fruit lying in their path, and though they 
once or twice had a quick glimpse of a native man`creature amongst 
the trees, they never again made direct contact. They decided they 
rather liked a race of people who made it clear that they were 
grateful simply to be left alone. 
The fruit and berries stopped after fifty miles, because that was 
where the sea started. 
Having no pressing calls on their time they built a raft and crossed 
the sea. It was reasonably calm, only about sixty miles wide and they 
had a reasonably pleasant crossing, landing in a country that was at 
least as beautiful as the one they had left. 
Life was, in short, ridiculously easy and for a while at least they 
were able to cope with the problems of aimlessness and isolation by 
deciding to ignore them. When the craving for company became too 
great they would know where to find it, but for the moment they 
were happy to feel that the Golgafrinchans were hundreds of miles 
behind them. 
Nevertheless, Ford Prefect began to use his Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matic 
more often again. Only once did he pick up a signal, but that was so 
faint and from such enormous distance that it depressed him more 
than the silence that had otherwise continued unbroken. 
On a whim they turned northwards. After weeks of travelling they 
came to another sea, built another raft and crossed it. This time it was 
harder going, the climate was getting colder. Arthur suspected a 
streak of masochism in Ford Prefect ʹ the increasing difficulty of the 
journey seemed to give him a sense of purpose that was otherwise 
lacking. He strode onwards relentlessly. 
Their journey northwards brought them into steep mountainous 
terrain of breathtaking sweep and beauty. The vast, jagged, snow 
covered peaks ravished their senses. The cold began to bite into their 
bones. 
They wrapped themselves in animal skins and furs which Ford 
Prefect acquired by a technique he once learned from a couple of ex`
Pralite monks running a Mind`Surfing resort in the Hills of Hunian. 
The galaxy is littered with ex`Pralite monks, all on the make, 
because the mental control techniques the Order have evolved as a 
form of devotional discipline are, frankly, sensational ʹ and 
extraordinary numbers of monks leave the Order just after they have 
finished their devotional training and just before they take their final 
vows to stay locked in small metal boxes for the rest of their lives. 
Ford's technique seemed to consist mainly of standing still for a 
while and smiling. 
After a while an animal ʹ a deer perhaps ʹ would appear from out 
of the trees and watch him cautiously. Ford would continue to smile 
at it, his eyes would soften and shine, and he would seem to radiate a 
deep and universal love, a love which reached out to embrace all of 
creation. A wonderful quietness would descend on the surrounding 
countryside, peaceful and serene, emanating from this transfigured 
man. Slowly the deer would approach, step by step, until it was 
almost nuzzling him, whereupon Ford Prefect would reach out to it 
and break its neck. 
"Pheromone control," he said it was, "you just have to know how 
to generate the right smell." 
Chapter 31
A few days after landing in this mountainous land they hit a 
coastline which swept diagonally before them from the south`west to 
the north`east, a coastline of monumental grandeur: deep majestic 
ravines, soaring pinnacles of ice`fjords. 
For two further days they scrambled and climbed over the rocks 
and glaciers, awe`struck with beauty. 
"Arthur " yelled Ford suddenly. 
It was the afternoon of the second day. Arthur was sitting on a high 
rock watching the thundering sea smashing itself against the craggy 
promontories. 
"Arthur " yelled Ford again. 
Arthur looked to where Ford's voice had come from, carried faintly 
in the wind. 
Ford had gone to examine a glacier, and Arthur found him there 
crouching by the solid wall of blue ice. He was tense with excitement
ʹ his eyes darted up to meet Arthur's. 
"Look," he said, "look " 
Arthur looked. He saw the solid wall of blue ice. 
"Yes," he said, "it's a glacier. I've already seen it." 
"No," said Ford, "you've looked at it, you haven't seen it. Look " 
Ford was pointing deep into the heart of the ice. 
Arthur peered ʹ he saw nothing but vague shadows. 
"Move back from it," insisted Ford, "look again." 
Arthur moved back and looked again. 
"No," he said, and shrugged. "What am I supposed to be looking 
for?" 
And suddenly he saw it. 
"You see it?" 
He saw it. 
His mouth started to speak, but his brain decided it hadn't got 
anything to say yet and shut it again. His brain then started to 
contend with the problem of what his eyes told it they were looking 
at, but in doing so relinquished control of the mouth which promptly 
fell open again. Once more gathering up the jaw, his brain lost control 
of his left hand which then wandered around in an aimless fashion. 
For a second or so the brain tried to catch the left hand without 
letting go of the mouth and simultaneously tried to think about what 
was buried in the ice, which is probably why the legs went and Arthur 
dropped restfully to the ground. 
The thing that had been causing all this neural upset was a network 
of shadows in the ice, about eighteen inches beneath the surface. 
Looked at it from the right angle they resolved into the solid shapes of 
letters from an alien alphabet, each about three feet high; and for 
those, like Arthur, who couldn't read Magrathean there was above 
the letters the outline of a face hanging in the ice. 
It was an old face, thin and distinguished, careworn but not unkind. 
It was the face of the man who had won an award for designing the 
coastline they now knew themselves to be standing on. 
Chapter 32
A thin whine filled the air. It whirled and howled through the trees 
upsetting the squirrels. A few birds flew off in disgust. The noise 
danced and skittered round the clearing. It whooped, it rasped, it 
generally offended. 
The Captain, however, regarded the lone bagpiper with an 
indulgent eye. Little could disturb his equanimity; indeed, once he 
had got over the loss of his gorgeous bath during that unpleasantness 
in the swamp all those months ago he had begun to find his new life 
remarkably congenial. A hollow had been scooped out of a large rock 
which stood in the middle of the clearing, and in this he would bask 
daily whilst attendants sloshed water over him. Not particularly warm 
water, it must be said, as they hadn't yet worked out a way of heating 
it. Never mind, that would come, and in the meantime search parties 
were scouring the countryside far and wide for a hot spring, 
preferably one in a nice leafy glade, and if it was near a soap mine ʹ
perfection. To those who said that they had a feeling soap wasn't 
found in mines, the Captain had ventured to suggest that perhaps 
that was because no one had looked hard enough, and this possibility 
had been reluctantly acknowledged. 
No, life was very pleasant, and the greatest thing about it was that 
when the hot spring was found, complete with leafy glade en suite, 
and when in the fullness of time the cry came reverberating across 
the hills that the soap mine had been located and was producing five 
hundred cakes a day it would be more pleasant still. It was very 
important to have things to look forward to. 
Wail, wail, screech, wail, howl, honk, squeak went the bagpipes, 
increasing the Captain's already considerable pleasure at the thought 
that any moment now they might stop. That was something he 
looked forward to as well. 
What else was pleasant, he asked himself? Well, so many things: 
the red and gold of the trees, now that autumn was approaching; the 
peaceful chatter of scissors a few feet from his bath where a couple of 
hairdressers were exercising their skills on a dozing art director and
his assistant; the sunlight gleaming off the six shiny telephones lined 
up along the edge of his rock`hewn bath. The only thing nicer than a 
phone that didn't ring all the time (or indeed at all) was six phones 
that didn't ring all the time (or indeed at all). 
Nicest of all was the happy murmur of all the hundreds of people 
slowly assembling in the clearing around him to watch the afternoon 
committee meeting. 
The Captain punched his rubber duck playfully on the beak. The 
afternoon committee meetings were his favourite. 
Other eyes watched the assembling crowds. High in a tree on the 
edge of the clearing squatted Ford Prefect, lately returned from 
foreign climes. After his six month journey he was lean and healthy, 
his eyes gleamed, he wore a reindeer`skin coat; his beard was as thick 
and his face as bronzed as a country`rock singer's. 
He and Arthur Dent had been watching the Golgafrinchans for 
almost a week now, and Ford had decided to stir things up a bit. 
The clearing was now full. Hundreds of men and women lounged 
around, chatting, eating fruit, playing cards and generally having a 
fairly relaxed time of it. Their track suits were now all dirty and even 
torn, but they all had immaculately styled hair. Ford was puzzled to 
see that many of them had stuffed their track suits full of leaves and 
wondered if this was meant to be some form of insulation against the 
coming winter. Ford's eyes narrowed. They couldn't be interested in 
botany of a sudden could they? 
In the middle of these speculations the Captain's voice rose above 
the hubbub. 
"Alright," he said, "I'd like to call this meeting to some sort of order 
if that's at all possible. Is that alright with everybody?" He smiled 
genially. "In a minute. When you're all ready." 
The talking gradually died away and the clearing fell silent, except 
for the bagpiper who seemed to be in some wild and uninhabitable 
musical world of his own. A few of those in his immediate vicinity 
threw some leaves to him. If there was any reason for this then it 
escaped Ford Prefect for the moment.
A small group of people had clustered round the Captain and one 
of them was clearly beginning to speak. He did this by standing up, 
clearing his throat and then gazing off into the distance as if to signify 
to the crowd that he would be with them in a minute. 
The crowd of course were riveted and all turned their eyes on him. 
A moment of silence followed, which Ford judged to be the right 
dramatic moment to make his entry. The man turned to speak. 
Ford dropped down out of the tree. 
"Hi there," he said.
The crowd swivelled round. 
"Ah my dear fellow," called out the Captain, "Got any matches on 
you? Or a lighter? Anything like that?" 
"No," said Ford, sounding a little deflated. It wasn't what he'd 
prepared. He decided he'd better be a little stronger on the subject. 
"No I haven't," he continued, "No matches. Instead I bring you 
news..." 
"Pity," said the Captain, "We've all run out you see. Haven't had a 
hot bath in weeks." 
Ford refused to be headed off. 
"I bring you news," he said, "of a discovery that might interest 
you." 
"Is it on the agenda?" snapped the man whom Ford had 
interrupted. 
Ford smiled a broad country`rock singer smile. 
"Now, come on," he said. 
"Well I'm sorry," said the man huffily, "but speaking as a 
management consultant of many years' standing, I must insist on the 
importance of observing the committee structure." 
Ford looked round the crowd. 
"He's mad you know," he said, "this is a prehistoric planet." 
"Address the chair " snapped the management consultant. 
"There isn't chair," explained Ford, "there's only a rock." 
The management consultant decided that testiness was what the 
situation now called for. 
"Well, call it a chair," he said testily. 
"Why not call it a rock?" asked Ford. 
"You obviously have no conception," said the management 
consultant, not abandoning testiness in favour of good old fashioned 
hauteur, "of modern business methods." 
"And you have no conception of where you are," said Ford. 
A girl with a strident voice leapt to her feet and used it. 
"Shut up, you two," she said, "I want to table a motion." 
"You mean boulder a motion," tittered a hairdresser. 
"Order, order " yapped the management consultant. 
"Alright," said Ford, "let's see how you are doing." He plonked 
himself down on the ground to see how long he could keep his 
temper. 
The Captain made a sort of conciliatory harrumphing noise. 
"I would like to call to order," he said pleasantly, "the five hundred 
and seventy`third meeting of the colonization committee of 
Fintlewoodlewix..." 
Ten seconds, thought Ford as he leapt to his feet again. 
"This is futile," he exclaimed, "five hundred and seventy`three 
committee meetings and you haven't even discovered fire yet " 
"If you would care," said the girl with the strident voice, "to 
examine the agenda sheet..." 
"Agenda rock," trilled the hairdresser happily. 
"Thank you, I've made that point," muttered Ford. 
"... you... will... see..." continued the girl firmly, "that we are having 
a report from the hairdressers' Fire Development Sub`Committee 
today." 
"Oh... ah ʹ " said the hairdresser with a sheepish look which is 
recognized the whole Galaxy over as meaning "Er, will next Tuesday 
do?" 
"Alright," said Ford, rounding on him, "what have you done? What 
are you going to do? What are your thoughts on fire development?" 
"Well I don't know," said the hairdresser, "All they gave me was a 
couple of sticks..." 
"So what have you done with them?" 
Nervously, the hairdresser fished in his track suit top and handed 
over the fruits of his labour to Ford. 
Ford held them up for all to see. 
"Curling tongs," he said. 
The crowd applauded. 
"Never mind," said Ford, "Rome wasn't burnt in a day." 
The crowd hadn't the faintest idea what he was talking about, but 
they loved it nevertheless. They applauded. 
"Well, you're obviously being totally naive of course," said the girl, 
"When you've been in marketing as long as I have you'll know that 
before any new product can be developed it has to be properly 
researched. We've got to find out what people want from fire, how 
they relate to it, what sort of image it has for them." 
The crowd were tense. They were expecting something wonderful 
from Ford. 
"Stick it up your nose," he said. 
"Which is precisely the sort of thing we need to know," insisted the 
girl, "Do people want fire that can be applied nasally?" 
"Do you?" Ford asked the crowd. 
"Yes " shouted some. 
"No " shouted others happily. 
They didn't know, they just thought it was great. 
"And the wheel," said the Captain, "What about this wheel thingy? 
It sounds a terribly interesting project." 
"Ah," said the marketing girl, "Well, we're having a little difficulty 
there." 
"Difficulty?" exclaimed Ford, "Difficulty? What do you mean, 
difficulty? It's the single simplest machine in the entire Universe " 
The marketing girl soured him with a look. 
"Alright, Mr. Wiseguy," she said, "you're so clever, you tell us what 
colour it should have." 
The crowd went wild. One up to the home team, they thought. 
Ford shrugged his shoulders and sat down again. 
"Almighty Zarquon," he said, "have none of you done anything?" 
As if in answer to his question there was a sudden clamour of noise 
from the entrance to the clearing. The crowd couldn't believe the 
amount of entertainment they were getting this afternoon: in 
marched a squad of about a dozen men dressed in the remnants of 
their Golgafrincham 3rd Regiment dress uniforms. About half of them 
still carried Kill`O`Zap guns, the rest now carried spears which they 
struck together as they marched. They looked bronzed, healthy, and 
utterly exhausted and bedraggled. They clattered to a halt and 
banged to attention. One of them fell over and never moved again. 
"Captain, sir " cried Number Two ʹ for he was their leader ʹ
"Permission to report sir " 
"Yes, alright Number Two, welcome back and all that. Find any hot 
springs?" said the Captain despondently. 
"No sir " 
"Thought you wouldn't." 
Number Two strode through the crowd and presented arms before 
the bath. 
"We have discovered another continent " 
"When was this?" 
"It lies across the sea..." said Number Two, narrowing his eyes 
significantly, "to the east " 
"Ah." 
Number Two turned to face the crowd. He raised his gun above his 
head. This is going to be great, thought the crowd. 
"We have declared war on it " 
Wild abandoned cheering broke out in all corners of the clearing ʹ
this was beyond all expectation. 
"Wait a minute," shouted Ford Prefect, "wait a minute " 
He leapt to his feet and demanded silence. After a while he got it, 
or at least the best silence he could hope for under the circumstances: 
the circumstances were that the bagpiper was spontaneously 
composing a national anthem. 
"Do we have to have the piper?" demanded Ford. 
"Oh yes," said the Captain, "we've given him a grant." 
Ford considered opening this idea up for debate but quickly 
decided that that way madness lay. Instead he slung a well judged 
rock at the piper and turned to face Number Two. 
"War?" he said. 
"Yes " Number Two gazed contemptuously at Ford Prefect. 
"On the next continent?" 
"Yes  Total warfare  The war to end all wars " 
"But there's no one even living there yet " 
Ah, interesting, thought the crowd, nice point. 
Number Two's gaze hovered undisturbed. In this respect his eyes 
were like a couple of mosquitos that hover purposefully three inches 
from your nose and refuse to be deflected by arm thrashes, fly swats 
or rolled newspapers. 
"I know that," he said, "but there will be one day  So we have left 
an open`ended ultimatum." 
"What?" 
"And blown up a few military installations." 
The Captain leaned forward out of his bath. 
"Military installations Number Two?" he said. 
For a moment the eyes wavered. 
"Yes sir, well potential military installations. Alright... trees." 
The moment of uncertainty passed ʹ his eyes flickered like whips 
over his audience. 
"And," he roared, "we interrogated a gazelle " 
He flipped his Kill`O`Zap gun smartly under his arm and marched 
off through the pandemonium that had now erupted throughout the 
ecstatic crowd. A few steps was all he managed before he was caught 
up and carried shoulder high for a lap of honour round the clearing. 
Ford sat and idly tapped a couple of stones together. 
"So what else have you done?" he inquired after the celebrations 
had died down. 
"We have started a culture," said the marketing girl. 
"Oh yes?" said Ford. 
"Yes. One of our film producers is already making a fascinating 
documentary about the indigenous cavemen of the area." 
"They're not cavemen." 
"They look like cavemen." 
"Do they live in caves?" 
"Well..." 
"They live in huts." 
"Perhaps they're having their caves redecorated," called out a wag 
from the crowd. 
Ford rounded on him angrily. 
"Very funny," he said, "but have you noticed that they're dying 
out?" 
On their journey back, Ford and Arthur had come across two 
derelict villages and the bodies of many natives in the woods, where 
they had crept away to die. Those that still lived were stricken and 
listless, as if they were suffering some disease of the spirit rather than 
the body. They moved sluggishly and with an infinite sadness. Their 
future had been taken away from them. 
"Dying out " repeated Ford. "Do you know what that means?" 
"Er... we shouldn't sell them any life insurance?" called out the wag 
again. 
Ford ignored him, and appealed to the whole crowd. 
"Can you try and understand," he said, "that it's just since we've 
arrived that they've started dying out " 
"In fact that comes over terribly well in this film," said the 
marketing girl, "and just gives it that poignant twist which is the 
hallmark of the really great documentary. The producer's very 
committed." 
"He should be," muttered Ford. 
"I gather," said the girl, turning to address the Captain who was 
beginning to nod off, "that he wants to make one about you next, 
Captain." 
"Oh really?" he said, coming to with a start, "that's awfully nice." 
"He's got a very strong angle on it, you know, the burden of 
responsibility, the loneliness of command..." 
The Captain hummed and hahed about this for a moment. 
"Well, I wouldn't overstress that angle, you know," he said finally, 
"one's never alone with a rubber duck." 
He held the duck aloft and it got an appreciative round from the 
crowd. 
All the while, the Management Consultant had been sitting in stony 
silence, his finger tips pressed to his temples to indicate that he was 
waiting and would wait all day if it was necessary. 
At this point he decided he would not wait all day after all, he 
would merely pretend that the last half hour hadn't happened. 
He rose to his feet. 
"If," he said tersely, "we could for a moment move on to the 
subject of fiscal policy..." 
"Fiscal policy " whooped Ford Prefect, "Fiscal policy " 
The Management Consultant gave him a look that only a lungfish 
could have copied. 
"Fiscal policy..." he repeated, "that is what I said." 
"How can you have money," demanded Ford, "if none of you 
actually produces anything? It doesn't grow on trees you know." 
"If you would allow me to continue..." 
Ford nodded dejectedly. 
"Thank you. Since we decided a few weeks ago to adopt the leaf as 
legal tender, we have, of course, all become immensely rich." 
Ford stared in disbelief at the crowd who were murmuring 
appreciatively at this and greedily fingering the wads of leaves with 
which their track suits were stuffed. 
"But we have also," continued the Management Consultant, "run 
into a small inflation problem on account of the high level of leaf 
availability, which means that, I gather, the current going rate has 
something like three deciduous forests buying one ship's peanut." 
Murmurs of alarm came from the crowd. The Management 
Consultant waved them down. 
"So in order to obviate this problem," he continued, "and 
effectively revaluate the leaf, we are about to embark on a massive 
defoliation campaign, and... er, burn down all the forests. I think you'll 
all agree that's a sensible move under the circumstances." 
The crowd seemed a little uncertain about this for a second or two 
until someone pointed out how much this would increase the value of 
the leaves in their pockets whereupon they let out whoops of delight 
and gave the Management Consultant a standing ovation. The 
accountants amongst them looked forward to a profitable Autumn. 
"You're all mad," explained Ford Prefect. 
"You're absolutely barmy," he suggested. 
"You're a bunch of raving nutters," he opined. 
The tide of opinion started to turn against him. What had started 
out as excellent entertainment had now, in the crowd's view, 
deteriorated into mere abuse, and since this abuse was in the main 
directed at them they wearied of it. 
Sensing this shift in the wind, the marketing girl turned on him. 
"Is it perhaps in order," she demanded, "to inquire what you've 
been doing all these months then? You and that other interloper have 
been missing since the day we arrived." 
"We've been on a journey," said Ford, "We went to try and find out 
something about this planet." 
"Oh," said the girl archly, "doesn't sound very productive to me." 
"No? Well have I got news for you, my love. We have discovered 
this planet's future." 
Ford waited for this statement to have its effect. It didn't have any. 
They didn't know what he was talking about. 
He continued. 
"It doesn't matter a pair of fetid dingo's kidneys what you all 
choose to do from now on. Burn down the forests, anything, it won't 
make a scrap of difference. Your future history has already happened. 
Two million years you've got and that's it. At the end of that time your 
race will be dead, gone and good riddance to you. Remember that, 
two million years " 
The crowd muttered to itself in annoyance. People as rich as they 
had suddenly become shouldn't be obliged to listen to this sort of 
gibberish. Perhaps they could tip the fellow a leaf or two and he 
would go away. 
They didn't need to bother. Ford was already stalking out of the 
clearing, pausing only to shake his head at Number Two who was 
already firing his Kill`O`Zap gun into some neighbouring trees. 
He turned back once. 
"Two million years " he said and laughed. 
"Well," said the Captain with a soothing smile, "still time for a few 
more baths. Could someone pass me the sponge? I just dropped it 
over the side." 
Chapter 33
A mile or so away through the wood, Arthur Dent was too busily 
engrossed with what he was doing to hear Ford Prefect approach. 
What he was doing was rather curious, and this is what it was: on a 
wide flat piece of rock he had scratched out the shape of a large 
square, subdivided into one hundred and sixty`nine smaller squares, 
thirteen to a side. 
Furthermore he had collected together a pile of smallish flattish 
stones and scratched the shape of a letter on to each. Sitting 
morosely round the rock were a couple of the surviving local native 
men whom Arthur Dent was trying to introduce the curious concept 
embodied in these stones. 
So far they had not done well. They had attempted to eat some of 
them, bury others and throw the rest of them away. Arthur had finally 
encouraged one of them to lay a couple of stones on the board he 
had scratched out, which was not even as far as he'd managed to get 
the day before. Along with the rapid deterioration in the morale of 
these creatures, there seemed to be a corresponding deterioration in 
their actual intelligence. 
In an attempt to egg them along, Arthur set out a number of letters 
on the board himself, and then tried to encourage the natives to add 
some more themselves. 
It was not going well. 
Ford watched quietly from beside a nearby tree. 
"No," said Arthur to one of the natives who had just shuffled some 
of the letters round in a fit of abysmal dejection, "Q scores ten you 
see, and it's on a triple word score, so... look, I've explained the rules 
to you... no no, look please, put down that jawbone... alright, we'll 
start again. And try to concentrate this time." 
Ford leaned his elbow against the tree and his hand against his 
head. 
"What are you doing, Arthur?" he asked quietly. 
Arthur looked up with a start. He suddenly had a feeling that all 
this might look slightly foolish. All he knew was that it had worked like 
a dream on him when he was a child. But things were different then, 
or rather would be. 
"I'm trying to teach the cavemen to play Scrabble," he said. 
"They're not cavemen," said Ford. 
"They look like cavemen." 
Ford let it pass. 
"I see," he said. 
"It's uphill work," said Arthur wearily, "the only word they know is 
grunt and they can't spell it." 
He sighed and sat back. 
"What's that supposed to achieve?" asked Ford. 
"We've got to encourage them to evolve  To develop " Arthur 
burst out angrily. He hoped that the weary sigh and then the anger 
might do something to counteract the overriding feeling of 
foolishness from which he was currently suffering. It didn't. He 
jumped to his feet. 
"Can you imagine what a world would be like descended from 
those... cretins we arrived with?" he said. 
"Imagine?" said Ford, rising his eyebrows. "We don't have to 
imagine. We've seen it." 
"But..." Arthur waved his arms about hopelessly. 
"We've seen it," said Ford, "there's no escape." 
Arthur kicked at a stone. 
"Did you tell them what we've discovered?" he asked. 
"Hmmmm?" said Ford, not really concentrating. 
"Norway," said Arthur, "Slartibartfast's signature in the glacier. Did 
you tell them?" 
"What's the point?" said Ford, "What would it mean to them?" 
"Mean?" said Arthur, "Mean? You know perfectly well what it 
means. It means that this planet is the Earth  It's my home  It's where 
I was born " 
"Was?" said Ford. 
"Alright, will be." 
"Yes, in two million years' time. Why don't you tell them that? Go 
and say to them, 'Excuse me, I'd just like to point out that in two 
million years' time I will be born just a few miles from here.' See what 
they say. They'll chase you up a tree and set fire to it." 
Arthur absorbed this unhappily. 
"Face it," said Ford, "those zeebs over there are your ancestors, not 
these poor creatures here." 
He went over to where the apemen creatures were rummaging 
listlessly with the stone letters. He shook his head. 
"Put the Scrabble away, Arthur," he said, "it won't save the human 
race, because this lot aren't going to be the human race. The human 
race is currently sitting round a rock on the other side of this hill 
making documentaries about themselves." 
Arthur winced. 
"There must be something we can do," he said. A terrible sense of 
desolation thrilled through his body that he should be here, on the 
Earth, the Earth which had lost its future in a horrifying arbitrary 
catastrophe and which now seemed set to lose its past as well. 
"No," said Ford, "there's nothing we can do. This doesn't change 
the history of the Earth, you see, this is the history of the Earth. Like it 
or leave it, the Golgafrinchans are the people you are descended from. 
In two million years they get destroyed by the Vogons. History is 
never altered you see, it just fits together like a jigsaw. Funny old 
thing, life, isn't it?" 
He picked up the letter Q and hurled it into a distant pivet bush 
where it hit a young rabbit. The rabbit hurtled off in terror and didn't 
stop till it was set upon and eaten by a fox which choked on one of its 
bones and died on the bank of a stream which subsequently washed 
it away. 
During the following weeks Ford Prefect swallowed his pride and 
struck up a relationship with a girl who had been a personnel officer 
on Golgafrincham, and he was terribly upset when she suddenly 
passed away as a result of drinking water from a pool that had been 
polluted by the body of a dead fox. The only moral it is possible to 
draw from this story is that one should never throw the letter Q into a 
pivet bush, but unfortunately there are times when it is unavoidable. 
Like most of the really crucial things in life, this chain of events was 
completely invisible to Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent. They were 
looking sadly at one of the natives morosely pushing the other letters 
around. 
"Poor bloody caveman," said Arthur. 
"They're not..." 
"What?" 
"Oh never mind." 
The wretched creature let out a pathetic howling noise and banged 
on the rock. 
"It's all been a bit of waste of time for them, hasn't it?" said Arthur. 
"Uh uh urghhhhh," muttered the native and banged on the rock 
again. 
"They've been outevolved by telephone sanitizers." 
"Urgh, gr gr, gruh " insisted the native, continuing to bang on the 
rock. 
"Why does he keep banging on the rock?" said Arthur. 
"I think he probably wants you to Scrabble with him again," said 
Ford, "he's pointing at the letters." 
"Probably spelt crzjgrdwldiwdc again, poor bastard. I keep on 
telling him there's only one g in crzjgrdwldiwdc." 
The native banged on the rock again. 
They looked over his shoulder. 
Their eyes popped. 
There amongst the jumble of letters were eight that had been laid 
out in a clear straight line. 
They spelt two words. 
The words were these: 
"Forty`Two." 
"Grrrurgh guh guh," explained the native. He swept the letters 
angrily away and went and mooched under a nearby tree with his 
colleague. 
Ford and Arthur stared at him. Then they stared at each other. 
"Did that say what I thought it said?" they both said to each other. 
"Yes," they both said. 
"Forty`two," said Arthur. 
"Forty`two," said Ford. 
Arthur ran over to the two natives. 
"What are you trying to tell us?" he shouted. "What's it supposed 
to mean?" 
One of them rolled over on the ground, kicked his legs up in the air, 
rolled over again and went to sleep. 
The other bounded up the tree and threw horse chestnuts at Ford 
Prefect. Whatever it was they had to say, they had already said it. 
"You know what this means," said Ford. 
"Not entirely." 
"Forty`two is the number Deep Thought gave as being the Ultimate 
Answer." 
"Yes." 
And the Earth is the computer Deep Thought designed and built to 
calculate the Question to the Ultimate Answer." 
"So we are led to believe." 
"And organic life was part of the computer matrix." 
"If you say so." 
"I do say so. That means that these natives, these apemen are an 
integral part of the computer program, and that we and the 
Golgafrinchans are not." 
"But the cavemen are dying out and the Golgafrinchans are 
obviously set to replace them." 
"Exactly. So do you see what this means?" 
"What?" 
"Cock up," said Ford Prefect. 
Arthur looked around him. 
"This planet is having a pretty bloody time of it," he said. 
Ford puzzled for a moment. 
"Still, something must have come out of it," he said at last, 
"because Marvin said he could see the Question printed in your brain 
wave patterns." 
"But..." 
"Probably the wrong one, or a distortion of the right one. It might 
give us a clue though if we could find it. I don't see how we can 
though." 
They moped about for a bit. Arthur sat on the ground and started 
pulling up bits of grass, but found that it wasn't an occupation he 
could get deeply engrossed in. It wasn't grass he could believe in, the 
trees seemed pointless, the rolling hills seemed to be rolling to 
nowhere and the future seemed just a tunnel to be crawled through. 
Ford fiddled with his Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matic. It was silent. He 
sighed and put it away. 
Arthur picked up one of the letter stones from his home`made 
Scrabble set. It was a T. He sighed and out it down again. The letter he 
put down next to it was an I. That spelt IT. He tossed another couple 
of letters next to them They were an S and an H as it happened. By a 
curious coincidence the resulting word perfectly expressed the way 
Arthur was feeling about things just then. He stared at it for a 
moment. He hadn't done it deliberately, it was just a random chance. 
His brain got slowly into first gear. 
"Ford," he said suddenly, "look, if that Question is printed in my 
brain wave patterns but I'm not consciously aware of it it must be 
somewhere in my unconscious." 
"Yes, I suppose so." 
"There might be a way of bringing that unconscious pattern 
forward." 
"Oh yes?" 
"Yes, by introducing some random element that can be shaped by 
that pattern." 
"Like how?" 
"Like by pulling Scrabble letters out of a bag blindfolded." 
Ford leapt to his feet. 
"Brilliant " he said. He tugged his towel out of his satchel and with 
a few deft knots transformed it into a bag. 
"Totally mad," he said, "utter nonsense. But we'll do it because it's 
brilliant nonsense. Come on, come on." 
The sun passed respectfully behind a cloud. A few small sad 
raindrops fell. 
They piled together all the remaining letters and dropped them 
into the bag. They shook them up. 
"Right," said Ford, "close your eyes. Pull them out. Come on come 
on, come on." 
Arthur closed his eyes and plunged his hand into the towelful of 
stones. He jiggled them about, pulled out four and handed them to 
Ford. Ford laid them along the ground in the order he got them. 
"W," said Ford, "H, A, T... What " 
He blinked. 
"I think it's working " he said. 
Arthur pushed three more at him. 
"D, O, Y... Doy. Oh perhaps it isn't working," said Ford. 
"Here's the next three." 
"O, U, G... Doyoug... It's not making sense I'm afraid." 
Arthur pulled another two from the bag. Ford put them in place. 
"E, T, doyouget... Do you get " shouted Ford, "it is working  This is 
amazing, it really is working " 
"More here." Arthur was throwing them out feverishly as fast as he 
could go. 
"I, F," said Ford, "Y, O, U,... M, U, L, T, I, P, L, Y,... What do you get if 
you multiply,... S, I, X,... six, B, Y, by, six by... what do you get if you 
multiply six by... N, I, N, E,... six by nine..." He paused. "Come on, 
where's the next one?" 
"Er, that's the lot," said Arthur, "that's all there were." 
He sat back, nonplussed. 
He rooted around again in the knotted up towel but there were no 
more letters. 
"You mean that's it?" said Ford. 
"That's it." 
"Six by nine. Forty`two." 
"That's it. That's all there is." 
Chapter 34
The sun came out and beamed cheerfully at them. A bird sang. A 
warm breeze wafted through the trees and lifted the heads of the 
flowers, carrying their scent away through the woods. An insect 
droned past on its way to do whatever it is that insects do in the late 
afternoon. The sound of voices lilted through the trees followed a 
moment later by two girls who stopped in surprise at the sight of Ford 
Prefect and Arthur Dent apparently lying on the ground in agony, but 
in fact rocking with noiseless laughter. 
"No, don't go," called Ford Prefect between gasps, "we'll be with 
you in a moment." 
"What's the matter?" asked one of the girls. She was the taller and 
slimmer of the two. On Golgafrincham she had been a junior 
personnel officer, but hadn't liked it much. 
Ford pulled himself together. 
"Excuse me," he said, "hello. My friend and I were just 
contemplating the meaning of life. Frivolous exercise." 
"Oh it's you," said the girl, "you made a bit of a spectacle of 
yourself this afternoon. You were quite funny to begin with but you 
did bang on a bit." 
"Did I? Oh yes." 
"Yes, what was all that for?" asked the other girl, a shorter round`
faced girl who had been an art director for a small advertising 
company on Golgafrincham. Whatever the privations of this world 
were, she went to sleep every night profoundly grateful for the fact 
that whatever she had to face in the morning it wouldn't be a 
hundred almost identical photographs of moodily lit tubes of 
toothpaste. 
"For? For nothing. Nothing's for anything," said Ford Prefect 
happily. "Come and join us. I'm Ford, this is Arthur. We were just 
about to do nothing at all for a while but it can wait." 
The girls looked at them doubtfully. 
"I'm Agda," said the tall one, "this is Mella." 
"Hello Agda, hello Mella," said Ford. 
"Do you talk at all?" said Mella to Arthur.
"Oh, eventually," said Arthur with a smile, "but not as much as 
Ford." 
"Good." 
There was a slight pause. 
"What did you mean," asked Agda, "about only having two million 
years? I couldn't make sense of what you were saying." 
"Oh that," said Ford, "it doesn't matter." 
"It's just that the world gets demolished to make way for a 
hyperspace bypass," said Arthur with a shrug, "but that's two million 
years away, and anyway it's just Vogons doing what Vogons do." 
"Vogons?" said Mella. 
"Yes, you wouldn't know them." 
"Where'd you get this idea from?" 
"It really doesn't matter. It's just like a dream from the past, or the 
future." Arthur smiled and looked away. 
"Does it worry you that you don't talk any kind of sense?" asked 
Agda. 
"Listen, forget it," said Ford, "forget all of it. Nothing matters. Look, 
it's a beautiful day, enjoy it. The sun, the green of the hills, the river 
down in the valley, the burning trees." 
"Even if it's only a dream, it's a pretty horrible idea," said Mella, 
"destroying a world just to make a bypass." 
"Oh, I've heard of worse," said Ford, "I read of one planet off in the 
seventh dimension that got used as a ball in a game of intergalactic 
bar billiards. Got potted straight into a black hole. Killed ten billion 
people." 
"That's mad," said Mella. 
"Yes, only scored thirty points too." 
Agda and Mella exchanged glances. 
"Look," said Agda, "there's a party after the committee meeting 
tonight. You can come along if you like." 
"Yeah, OK," said Ford. 
"I'd like to," said Arthur. 
Many hours later Arthur and Mella sat and watched the moon rise 
over the dull red glow of the trees. 
"That story about the world being destroyed..." began Mella. 
"In two million years, yes." 
"You say it as if you really think it's true." 
"Yes, I think it is. I think I was there." 
She shook her head in puzzlement. 
"You're very strange," she said. 
"No, I'm very ordinary," said Arthur, "but some very strange things 
have happened to me. You could say I'm more differed from than 
differing." 
"And that other world your friend talked about, the one that got 
pushed into a black hole." 
"Ah, that I don't know about. It sounds like something from the 
book." 
"What book?" 
Arthur paused. 
"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy," he said at last. 
"What's that?" 
"Oh, just something I threw into the river this evening. I don't think 
I'll be wanting it any more," said Arthur Dent. 
DOUGLAS ADAMS 
LIFE,(THE UNIVERSE AND 
EVERYTHING 
for Sally 
Chapter 1
The regular early morning yell of horror was the sound of Arthur 
Dent waking up and suddenly remembering where he was. 
It wasn't just that the cave was cold, it wasn't just that it was damp 
and smelly. It was the fact that the cave was in the middle of Islington 
and there wasn't a bus due for two million years. 
Time is the worst place, so to speak, to get lost in, as Arthur Dent 
could testify, having been lost in both time and space a good deal. At 
least being lost in space kept you busy. 
He was stranded in prehistoric Earth as the result of a complex 
sequence of events which had involved him being alternately blown 
up and insulted in more bizarre regions of the Galaxy than he ever 
dreamt existed, and though his life had now turned very, very, very 
quiet, he was still feeling jumpy. 
He hadn't been blown up now for five years. 
Since he had hardly seen anyone since he and Ford Prefect had 
parted company four years previously, he hadn't been insulted in all 
that time either. 
Except just once. 
It had happened on a spring evening about two years previously. 
He was returning to his cave just a little after dusk when he 
became aware of lights flashing eerily through the clouds. He turned 
and stared, with hope suddenly clambering through his heart. Rescue. 
Escape. The castaway's impossible dream ʹ a ship. 
And as he watched, as he stared in wonder and excitement, a long 
silver ship descended through the warm evening air, quietly, without 
fuss, its long legs unlocking in a smooth ballet of technology. 
It alighted gently on the ground, and what little hum it had 
generated died away, as if lulled by the evening calm. 
A ramp extended itself. 
Light streamed out. 
A tall figure appeared silhouetted in the hatchway. It walked down 
the ramp and stood in front of Arthur. 
"You're a jerk, Dent," it said simply. 
It was alien, very alien. It had a peculiar alien tallness, a peculiar 
alien flattened head, peculiar slitty little alien eyes, extravagantly 
draped golden ropes with a peculiarly alien collar design, and pale 
grey`green alien skin which had about it that lustrous shine which 
most grey`green faces can only acquire with plenty of exercise and 
very expensive soap. 
Arthur boggled at it. 
It gazed levelly at him. 
Arthur's first sensations of hope and trepidation had instantly been 
overwhelmed by astonishment, and all sorts of thoughts were battling 
for the use of his vocal chords at this moment. 
"Whh...?" he said. 
"Bu... hu... uh..." he added. 
"Ru... ra... wah... who?" he managed finally to say and lapsed into a 
frantic kind of silence. He was feeling the effects of having not said 
anything to anybody for as long as he could remember. 
The alien creature frowned briefly and consulted what appeared to 
be some species of clipboard which he was holding in his thin and 
spindly alien hand. 
"Arthur Dent?" it said. 
Arthur nodded helplessly. 
"Arthur Philip Dent?" pursued the alien in a kind of efficient yap. 
"Er... er... yes... er... er," confirmed Arthur. 
"You're a jerk," repeated the alien, "a complete asshole." 
"Er..." 
The creature nodded to itself, made a peculiar alien tick on its 
clipboard and turned briskly back towards the ship. 
"Er..." said Arthur desperately, "er..." 
"Don't give me that " snapped the alien. It marched up the ramp, 
through the hatchway and disappeared into the ship. The ship sealed 
itself. It started to make a low throbbing hum. 
"Er, hey " shouted Arthur, and started to run helplessly towards it. 
"Wait a minute " he called. "What is this? What? Wait a minute " 
The ship rose, as if shedding its weight like a cloak to the ground, 
and hovered briefly. It swept strangely up into the evening sky. It 
passed up through the clouds, illuminating them briefly, and then was 
gone, leaving Arthur alone in an immensity of land dancing a 
helplessly tiny little dance. 
"What?" he screamed. "What? What? Hey, what? Come back here 
and say that " 
He jumped and danced until his legs trembled, and shouted till his 
lungs rasped. There was no answer from anyone. There was no one to 
hear him or speak to him. 
The alien ship was already thundering towards the upper reaches 
of the atmosphere, on its way out into the appalling void which 
separates the very few things there are in the Universe from each 
other. 
Its occupant, the alien with the expensive complexion, leaned back 
in its single seat. His name was Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged. 
He was a man with a purpose. Not a very good purpose, as he would 
have been the first to admit, but it was at least a purpose and it did at 
least keep him on the move. 
Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged was ʹ indeed, is ʹ one of the 
Universe's very small number of immortal beings. 
Those who are born immortal instinctively know how to cope with 
it, but Wowbagger was not one of them. Indeed he had come to hate 
them, the load of serene bastards. He had had his immortality thrust 
upon him by an unfortunate accident with an irrational particle 
accelerator, a liquid lunch and a pair of rubber bands. The precise 
details of the accident are not important because no one has ever 
managed to duplicate the exact circumstances under which it 
happened, and many people have ended up looking very silly, or dead, 
or both, trying. 
Wowbagger closed his eyes in a grim and weary expression, put 
some light jazz on the ship's stereo, and reflected that he could have 
made it if it hadn't been for Sunday afternoons, he really could have 
done. 
To begin with it was fun, he had a ball, living dangerously, taking 
risks, cleaning up on high`yield long`term investments, and just 
generally outliving the hell out of everybody. 
In the end, it was the Sunday afternoons he couldn't cope with, and 
that terrible listlessness which starts to set in at about 2.55, when you 
know that you've had all the baths you can usefully have that day, 
that however hard you stare at any given paragraph in the papers you 
will never actually read it, or use the revolutionary new pruning 
technique it describes, and that as you stare at the clock the hands 
will move relentlessly on to four o'clock, and you will enter the long 
dark teatime of the soul. 
So things began to pall for him. The merry smiles he used to wear 
at other people's funerals began to fade. He began to despise the 
Universe in general, and everyone in it in particular. 
This was the point at which he conceived his purpose, the thing 
which would drive him on, and which, as far as he could see, would 
drive him on forever. It was this. 
He would insult the Universe. 
That is, he would insult everybody in it. Individually, personally, 
one by one, and (this was the thing he really decided to grit his teeth 
over) in alphabetical order. 
When people protested to him, as they sometimes had done, that 
the plan was not merely misGuided but actually impossible because 
of the number of people being born and dying all the time, he would 
merely fix them with a steely look and say, "A man can dream can't 
he?" 
And so he started out. He equipped a spaceship that was built to 
last with the computer capable of handling all the data processing 
involved in keeping track of the entire population of the known 
Universe and working out the horrifically complicated routes involved. 
His ship fled through the inner orbits of the Sol star system, 
preparing to slingshot round the sun and fling itself out into 
interstellar space. 
"Computer," he said. 
"Here," yipped the computer. 
"Where next?" 
"Computing that." 
Wowbagger gazed for a moment at the fantastic jewellery of the 
night, the billions of tiny diamond worlds that dusted the infinite 
darkness with light. Every one, every single one, was on his itinerary. 
Most of them he would be going to millions of times over. 
He imagined for a moment his itinerary connecting up all the dots 
in the sky like a child's numbered dots puzzle. He hoped that from 
some vantage point in the Universe it might be seen to spell a very, 
very rude word. 
The computer beeped tunelessly to indicate that it had finished its 
calculations. 
"Folfanga," it said. It beeped. 
"Fourth world of the Folfanga system," it continued. It beeped 
again. 
"Estimated journey time, three weeks," it continued further. It 
beeped again. 
"There to meet with a small slug," it beeped, "of the genus A`Rth`
Urp`Hil`Ipdenu." 
"I believe," it added, after a slight pause during which it beeped, 
"that you had decided to call it a brainless prat." 
Wowbagger grunted. He watched the majesty of creation outside 
his window for a moment or two. 
"I think I'll take a nap," he said, and then added, "what network 
areas are we going to be passing through in the next few hours?" 
The computer beeped. 
"Cosmovid, Thinkpix and Home Brain Box," it said, and beeped. 
"Any movies I haven't seen thirty thousand times already?" 
"No." 
"Uh." 
"There's Angst in Space. You've only seen that thirty`three 
thousand five hundred and seventeen times." 
"Wake me for the second reel." 
The computer beeped. 
"Sleep well," it said. 
The ship fled on through the night. 
Meanwhile, on Earth, it began to pour with rain and Arthur Dent 
sat in his cave and had one of the most truly rotten evenings of his
entire life, thinking of things he could have said to the alien and 
swatting flies, who also had a rotten evening. 
The next day he made himself a pouch out of rabbit skin because 
he thought it would be useful to keep things in. 
Chapter 2
This morning, two years later than that, was sweet and fragrant as 
he emerged from the cave he called home until he could think of a 
better name for it or find a better cave. 
Though his throat was sore again from his early morning yell of 
horror, he was suddenly in a terrifically good mood. He wrapped his 
dilapidated dressing gown tightly around him and beamed at the 
bright morning. 
The air was clear and scented, the breeze flitted lightly through the 
tall grass around his cave, the birds were chirruping at each other, the 
butterflies were flitting about prettily, and the whole of nature 
seemed to be conspiring to be as pleasant as it possibly could. 
It wasn't all the pastoral delights that were making Arthur feel so 
cheery, though. He had just had a wonderful idea about how to cope 
with the terrible lonely isolation, the nightmares, the failure of all his 
attempts at horticulture, and the sheer futurelessness and futility of 
his life here on prehistoric Earth, which was that he would go mad. 
He beamed again and took a bite out of a rabbit leg left over from 
his supper. He chewed happily for a few moments and then decided 
formally to announce his decision. 
He stood up straight and looked the world squarely in the fields 
and hills. To add weight to his words he stuck the rabbit bone in his 
hair. He spread his arms out wide. 
"I will go mad " he announced. 
"Good idea," said Ford Prefect, clambering down from the rock on 
which he had been sitting. 
Arthur's brain somersaulted. His jaw did press`ups. 
"I went mad for a while," said Ford, "did me no end of good." 
"You see," said Ford, " ʹ ..." 
"Where have you been?" interrupted Arthur, now that his head 
had finished working out. 
"Around," said Ford, "around and about." He grinned in what he 
accurately judged to be an infuriating manner. "I just took my mind 
off the hook for a bit. I reckoned that if the world wanted me badly 
enough it would call back. It did." 
He took out of his now terribly battered and dilapidated satchel his 
Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matic. 
"At least," he said, "I think it did. This has been playing up a bit." He 
shook it. "If it was a false alarm I shall go mad," he said, "again." 
Arthur shook his head and sat down. He looked up. 
"I thought you must be dead..." he said simply. 
"So did I for a while," said Ford, "and then I decided I was a lemon 
for a couple of weeks. A kept myself amused all that time jumping in 
and out of a gin and tonic." 
Arthur cleared his throat, and then did it again. 
"Where," he said, "did you...?" 
"Find a gin and tonic?" said Ford brightly. "I found a small lake that 
thought it was a gin and tonic, and jumped in and out of that. At least, 
I think it thought it was a gin and tonic." 
"I may," he added with a grin which would have sent sane men 
scampering into trees, "have been imagining it." 
He waited for a reaction from Arthur, but Arthur knew better than 
that. 
"Carry on," he said levelly. 
"The point is, you see," said Ford, "that there is no point in driving 
yourself mad trying to stop yourself going mad. You might just as well 
give in and save your sanity for later." 
"And this is you sane again, is it?" said Arthur. "I ask merely for 
information." 
"I went to Africa," said Ford. 
"Yes?" 
"Yes." 
"What was that like?" 
"And this is your cave is it?" said Ford.
"Er, yes," said Arthur. He felt very strange. After nearly four years 
of total isolation he was so pleased and relieved to see Ford that he 
could almost cry. Ford was, on the other hand, an almost immediately 
annoying person. 
"Very nice," said Ford, in reference to Arthur's cave. "You must 
hate it." 
Arthur didn't bother to reply. 
"Africa was very interesting," said Ford, "I behaved very oddly 
there." 
He gazed thoughtfully into the distance. 
"I took up being cruel to animals," he said airily. "But only," he 
added, "as a hobby." 
"Oh yes," said Arthur, warily. 
"Yes," Ford assured him. "I won't disturb you with the details 
because they would ʹ " 
"What?" 
"Disturb you. But you may be interested to know that I am 
singlehandedly responsible for the evolved shape of the animal you 
came to know in later centuries as a giraffe. And I tried to learn to fly. 
Do you believe me?" 
"Tell me," said Arthur. 
"I'll tell you later. I'll just mention that the Guide says..." 
"The...?" 
"Guide. The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. You remember?" 
"Yes. I remember throwing it in the river." 
"Yes," said Ford, "but I fished it out." 
"You didn't tell me." 
"I didn't want you to throw it in again." 
"Fair enough," admitted Arthur. "It says?" 
"What?" 
"The Guide says?" 
"The Guide says there is an art to flying," said Ford, "or rather a 
knack. The knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground 
and miss." He smiled weakly. He pointed at the knees of his trousers 
and held his arms up to show the elbows. They were all torn and worn 
through. 
"I haven't done very well so far," he said. He stuck out his hand. 
"I'm very glad to see you again, Arthur," he added. 
Arthur shook his head in a sudden access of emotion and 
bewilderment. 
"I haven't seen anyone for years," he said, "not anyone. I can 
hardly even remember how to speak. I keep forgetting words. I 
practise you see. I practise by talking to... talking to... what are those 
things people think you're mad if you talk to? Like George the Third." 
"Kings?" suggested Ford. 
"No, no," said Arthur. "The things he used to talk to. We're 
surrounded by them for heaven's sake. I've planted hundreds myself. 
They all died. Trees  I practise by talking to trees. What's that for?" 
Ford still had his hand stuck out. Arthur looked at it with 
incomprehension. 
"Shake," prompted Ford. 
Arthur did, nervously at first, as if it might turn out to be a fish. 
Then he grasped it vigorously with both hands in an overwhelming 
flood of relief. He shook it and shook it. 
After a while Ford found it necessary to disengage. They climbed to 
the top of a nearby outcrop of rock and surveyed the scene around 
them. 
"What happened to the Golgafrinchans?" asked Ford. 
Arthur shrugged. 
"A lot of them didn't make it through the winter three years ago," 
he said, "and the few who remained in the spring said they needed a 
holiday and set off on a raft. History says that they must have 
survived..." 
"Huh," said Ford, "well well." He stuck his hands on his hips and 
looked round again at the empty world. Suddenly, there was about 
Ford a sense of energy and purpose. 
"We're going," he said excitedly, and shivered with energy. 
"Where? How?" said Arthur. 
"I don't know," said Ford, "but I just feel that the time is right. 
Things are going to happen. We're on our way." 
He lowered his voice to a whisper. 
"I have detected," he said, "disturbances in the wash." 
He gazed keenly into the distance and looked as if he would quite 
like the wind to blow his hair back dramatically at that point, but the 
wind was busy fooling around with some leaves a little way off. 
Arthur asked him to repeat what he had just said because he 
hadn't quite taken his meaning. Ford repeated it. 
"The wash?" said Arthur. 
"The space`time wash," said Ford, and as the wind blew briefly past 
at that moment, he bared his teeth into it. 
Arthur nodded, and then cleared his throat. 
"Are we talking about," he asked cautiously, "some sort of Vogon 
laundromat, or what are we talking about?" 
"Eddies," said Ford, "in the space`time continuum." 
"Ah," nodded Arthur, "is he? Is he?" He pushed his hands into the 
pocket of his dressing gown and looked knowledgeably into the 
distance. 
"What?" said Ford. 
"Er, who," said Arthur, "is Eddy, then, exactly?" 
Ford looked angrily at him. 
"Will you listen?" he snapped. 
"I have been listening," said Arthur, "but I'm not sure it's helped." 
Ford grasped him by the lapels of his dressing gown and spoke to 
him as slowly and distinctly and patiently as if he were somebody 
from a telephone company accounts department. 
"There seem..." he said, "to be some pools..." he said, "of 
instability..." he said, "in the fabric..." he said... 
Arthur looked foolishly at the cloth of his dressing gown where 
Ford was holding it. Ford swept on before Arthur could turn the 
foolish look into a foolish remark. 
"... in the fabric of space`time," he said. 
"Ah, that," said Arthur. 
"Yes, that," confirmed Ford. 
They stood there alone on a hill on prehistoric Earth and stared 
each other resolutely in the face. 
"And it's done what?" said Arthur. 
"It," said Ford, "has developed pools of instability." 
"Has it?" said Arthur, his eyes not wavering for a moment. 
"It has," said Ford with a similar degree of ocular immobility. 
"Good," said Arthur. 
"See?" said Ford. 
"No," said Arthur. 
There was a quiet pause. 
"The difficulty with this conversation," said Arthur after a sort of 
pondering look had crawled slowly across his face like a mountaineer 
negotiating a tricky outcrop, "is that it's very different from most of 
the ones I've had of late. Which, as I explained, have mostly been with 
trees. They weren't like this. Except perhaps some of the ones I've 
had with elms which sometimes get a bit bogged down." 
"Arthur," said Ford.
"Hello? Yes?" said Arthur. 
"Just believe everything I tell you, and it will all be very, very 
simple." 
"Ah, well I'm not sure I believe that." 
They sat down and composed their thoughts. 
Ford got out his Sub`Etha Sens`O`Matic. It was making vague 
humming noises and a tiny light on it was flickering faintly. 
"Flat battery?" said Arthur. 
"No," said Ford, "there is a moving disturbance in the fabric of 
space`time, an eddy, a pool of instability, and it's somewhere in our 
vicinity." 
"Where?" 
Ford moved the device in a slow lightly bobbing semi`circle. 
Suddenly the light flashed. 
"There " said Ford, shooting out his arm. "There, behind that sofa " 
Arthur looked. Much to his surprise, there was a velvet paisley`
covered Chesterfield sofa in the field in front of them. He boggled 
intelligently at it. Shrewd questions sprang into his mind. 
"Why," he said, "is there a sofa in that field?" 
"I told you " shouted Ford, leaping to his feet. "Eddies in the space`
time continuum " 
"And this is his sofa, is it?" asked Arthur, struggling to his feet and, 
he hoped, though not very optimistically, to his senses. 
"Arthur " shouted Ford at him, "that sofa is there because of the 
space`time instability I've been trying to get your terminally softened 
brain to get to grips with. It's been washed out of the continuum, it's 
space`time jetsam, it doesn't matter what it is, we've got to catch it, 
it's our only way out of here " 
He scrambled rapidly down the rocky outcrop and made off across 
the field. 
"Catch it?" muttered Arthur, then frowned in bemusement as he 
saw that the Chesterfield was lazily bobbing and wafting away across 
the grass. 
With a whoop of utterly unexpected delight he leapt down the rock 
and plunged off in hectic pursuit of Ford Prefect and the irrational 
piece of furniture. 
They careered wildly through the grass, leaping, laughing, shouting 
instructions to each other to head the thing off this way or that way. 
The sun shone dreamily on the swaying grass, tiny field animals 
scattered crazily in their wake. 
Arthur felt happy. He was terribly pleased that the day was for 
once working out so much according to plan. Only twenty minutes 
ago he had decided he would go mad, and now he was already 
chasing a Chesterfield sofa across the fields of prehistoric Earth. 
The sofa bobbed this way and that and seemed simultaneously to 
be as solid as the trees as it drifted past some of them and hazy as a 
billowing dream as it floated like a ghost through others. 
Ford and Arthur pounded chaotically after it, but it dodged and 
weaved as if following its own complex mathematical topography, 
which it was. Still they pursued, still it danced and span, and suddenly 
turned and dipped as if crossing the lip of a catastrophe graph, and 
they were practically on top of it. With a heave and a shout they leapt 
on it, the sun winked out, they fell through a sickening nothingness, 
and emerged unexpectedly in the middle of the pitch at Lord's Cricked 
Ground, St John's Wood, London, towards the end of the last Test 
Match of the Australian Series in the year 198`, with England needing 
only twenty`eight runs to win. 
Important facts from Galactic history, number one: (reproduced 
from the Siderial Daily Mentioner's Book of popular Galactic History.) 
The night sky over the planet Krikkit is the least interesting sight in 
the entire Universe. 
Chapter 3
It was a charming and delightful day at Lord's as Ford and Arthur 
tumbled haphazardly out of a space`time anomaly and hit the 
immaculate turf rather hard. 
The applause of the crowd was tremendous. It wasn't for them, but 
instinctively they bowed anyway, which was fortunate because the 
small red heavy ball which the crowd actually had been applauding 
whistled mere millimetres over Arthur's head. In the crowd a man 
collapsed. 
They threw themselves back to the ground which seemed to spin 
hideously around them. 
"What was that?" hissed Arthur. 
"Something red," hissed Ford back at him. 
"Where are we?" 
"Er, somewhere green." 
"Shapes," muttered Arthur. "I need shapes." 
The applause of the crowd had been rapidly succeeded by gasps of 
astonishment, and the awkward titters of hundreds of people who 
could not yet make up their minds about whether to believe what 
they had just seen or not. 
"This your sofa?" said a voice. 
"What was that?" whispered Ford. 
Arthur looked up. 
"Something blue," he said. 
"Shape?" said Ford. 
Arthur looked again. 
"It is shaped," he hissed at Ford, with his brow savagely furrowing, 
"like a policeman." 
They remained crouched there for a few moments, frowning 
deeply. The blue thing shaped like a policeman tapped them both on 
the shoulders. 
"Come on, you two," the shape said, "let's be having you." 
These words had an electrifying effect on Arthur. He leapt to his 
feet like an author hearing the phone ring and shot a series of startled 
glanced at the panorama around him which had suddenly settled 
down into something of quite terrifying ordinariness. 
"Where did you get this from?" he yelled at the policeman shape. 
"What did you say?" said the startled shape. 
"This is Lord's Cricket Ground, isn't it?" snapped Arthur. "Where did 
you find it, how did you get it here? I think," he added, clasping his 
hand to his brow, "that I had better calm down." He squatted down 
abruptly in front of Ford. 
"It is a policeman," he said, "What do we do?" 
Ford shrugged. 
"What do you want to do?" he said. 
"I want you," said Arthur, "to tell me that I have been dreaming for 
the last five years." 
Ford shrugged again, and obliged. 
"You've been dreaming for the last five years," he said. 
Arthur got to his feet. 
"It's all right, officer," he said. "I've been dreaming for the last five 
years. Ask him," he added, pointing at Ford, "he was in it." 
Having said this, he sauntered off towards the edge of the pitch, 
brushing down his dressing gown. He then noticed his dressing gown 
and stopped. He stared at it. He flung himself at the policeman. 
"So where did I get these clothes from?" he howled. 
He collapsed and lay twitching on the grass. 
Ford shook his head. 
"He's had a bad two million years," he said to the policeman, and 
together they heaved Arthur on to the sofa and carried him off the 
pitch and were only briefly hampered by the sudden disappearance of 
the sofa on the way. 
Reaction to all this from the crowd were many and various. Most of 
them couldn't cope with watching it, and listened to it on the radio 
instead. 
"Well, this is an interesting incident, Brian," said one radio 
commentator to another. "I don't think there have been any 
mysterious materializations on the pitch since, oh since, well I don't 
think there have been any ʹ have there? ʹ that I recall?" 
"Edgbaston, 1932?" 
"Ah, now what happened then..." 
"Well, Peter, I think it was Canter facing Willcox coming up to bowl 
from the pavilion end when a spectator suddenly ran straight across 
the pitch." 
There was a pause while the first commentator considered this. 
"Ye... e... s..." he said, "yes, there's nothing actually very mysterious 
about that, is there? He didn't actually materialize, did he? Just ran 
on." 
"No, that's true, but he did claim to have seen something 
materialize on the pitch." 
"Ah, did he?" 
"Yes. An alligator, I think, of some description." 
"Ah. And had anyone else noticed it?" 
"Apparently not. And no one was able to get a very detailed 
description from him, so only the most perfunctory search was 
made." 
"And what happened to the man?" 
"Well, I think someone offered to take him off and give him some 
lunch, but he explained that he'd already had a rather good one, so 
the matter was dropped and Warwickshire went on to win by three 
wickets." 
"So, not very like this current instance. For those of you who've just 
tuned in, you may be interested to know that, er... two men, two 
rather scruffily attired men, and indeed a sofa ʹ a Chesterfield I 
think?" 
"Yes, a Chesterfield." 
"Have just materialized here in the middle of Lord's Cricket Ground. 
But I don't think they meant any harm, they've been very good`
natured about it, and..." 
"Sorry, can I interrupt you a moment Peter and say that the sofa 
has just vanished." 
"So it has. Well, that's one mystery less. Still, it's definitely one for 
the record books I think, particularly occurring at this dramatic 
moment in play, England now needing only twenty`four runs to win 
the series. The men are leaving the pitch in the company of a police 
officer, and I think everyone's settling down now and play is about to 
resume." 
"Now, sir," said the policeman after they had made a passage 
through the curious crowd and laid Arthur's peacefully inert body on a 
blanket, "perhaps you'd care to tell me who you are, where you come 
from, and what that little scene was all about?" 
Ford looked at the ground for a moment as if steadying himself for 
something, then he straightened up and aimed a look at the 
policeman which hit him with the full force of every inch of the six 
hundred light`years' distance between Earth and Ford's home near 
Betelgeuse. 
"All right," said Ford, very quietly, "I'll tell you." 
"Yes, well, that won't be necessary," said the policeman hurriedly, 
"just don't let whatever it was happen again." The policeman turned 
around and wandered off in search of anyone who wasn't from 
Betelgeuse. Fortunately, the ground was full of them. 
Arthur's consciousness approached his body as from a great 
distance, and reluctantly. It had had some bad times in there. Slowly, 
nervously, it entered and settled down in to its accustomed position. 
Arthur sat up. 
"Where am I?" he said. 
"Lord's Cricket Ground," said Ford. 
"Fine," said Arthur, and his consciousness stepped out again for a 
quick breather. His body flopped back on the grass. 
Ten minutes later, hunched over a cup of tea in the refreshment 
tent, the colour started to come back to his haggard face. 
"How're you feeling?" said Ford. 
"I'm home," said Arthur hoarsely. He closed his eyes and greedily 
inhaled the steam from his tea as if it was`well, as far as Arthur was 
concerned, as if it was tea, which it was. 
"I'm home," he repeated, "home. It's England, it's today, the 
nightmare is over." He opened his eyes again and smiled serenely. 
"I'm where I belong," he said in an emotional whisper. 
"There are two things I fell which I should tell you," said Ford, 
tossing a copy of the Guardian over the table at him. 
"I'm home," said Arthur. 
"Yes," said Ford. "One is," he said pointing at the date at the top of 
the paper, "that the Earth will be demolished in two days' time." 
"I'm home," said Arthur. "Tea," he said, "cricket," he added with 
pleasure, "mown grass, wooden benches, white linen jackets, beer 
cans..." 
Slowly he began to focus on the newspaper. He cocked his head on 
one side with a slight frown. 
"I've seen that one before," he said. His eyes wandered slowly up 
to the date, which Ford was idly tapping at. His face froze for a second 
or two and then began to do that terribly slow crashing trick which 
Arctic ice ʹ floes do so spectacularly in the spring. 
"And the other thing," said Ford, "is that you appear to have a bone 
in your beard." He tossed back his tea. 
Outside the refreshment tent, the sun was shining on a happy 
crowd. It shone on white hats and red faces. It shone on ice lollies and 
melted them. It shone on the tears of small children whose ice lollies 
had just melted and fallen off the stick. It shone on the trees, it 
flashed off whirling cricket bats, it gleamed off the utterly 
extraordinary object which was parked behind the sight`screens and 
which nobody appeared to have noticed. It beamed on Ford and 
Arthur as they emerged blinking from the refreshment tent and 
surveyed the scene around them. 
Arthur was shaking. 
"Perhaps," he said, "I should..." 
"No," said Ford sharply. 
"What?" said Arthur. 
"Don't try and phone yourself up at home." 
"How did you know...?" 
Ford shrugged. 
"But why not?" said Arthur. 
"People who talk to themselves on the phone," said Ford, "never 
learn anything to their advantage." 
"But..." 
"Look," said Ford. He picked up an imaginary phone and dialled an 
imaginary dial. 
"Hello?" he said into the imaginary mouthpiece. "Is that Arthur 
Dent? Ah, hello, yes. This is Arthur Dent speaking. Don't hang up." 
He looked at the imaginary mouthpiece in disappointment. 
"He hung up," he said, shrugged, and put the imaginary phone 
neatly back on its imaginary hook. 
"This is not my first temporal anomaly," he added. 
A glummer look replaced the already glum look on Arthur Dent's 
face. 
"So we're not home and dry," he said. 
"We could not even be said," replied Ford, "to be home and 
vigorously towelling ourselves off." 
The game continued. The bowler approached the wicket at a lope, 
a trot, and then a run. He suddenly exploded in a flurry of arms and 
legs, out of which flew a ball. The batsman swung and thwacked it 
behind him over the sight`screens. Ford's eyes followed the trajectory 
of the ball and jogged momentarily. He stiffened. He looked along the 
flight path of the ball again and his eyes twitched again. 
"This isn't my towel," said Arthur, who was rummaging in his 
rabbit`skin bag. 
"Shhh," said Ford. He screwed his eyes up in concentration. 
"I had a Golgafrinchan jogging towel," continued Arthur, "it was 
blue with yellow stars on it. This isn't it." 
"Shhh," said Ford again. He covered one eye and looked with the 
other. 
"This one's pink," said Arthur, "it isn't yours is it?" 
"I would like you to shut up about your towel," said Ford. 
"It isn't my towel," insisted Arthur, "that is the point I am trying 
to..." 
"And the time at which I would like you to shut up about it," 
continued Ford in a low growl, "is now." 
"All right," said Arthur, starting to stuff it back into the primitively 
stitched rabbit`skin bag. "I realize that it is probably not important in 
the cosmic scale of things, it's just odd, that's all. A pink towel 
suddenly, instead of a blue one with yellow stars." 
Ford was beginning to behave rather strangely, or rather not 
actually beginning to behave strangely but beginning to behave in a 
way which was strangely different from the other strange ways in 
which he more regularly behaved. What he was doing was this. 
Regardless of the bemused stares it was provoking from his fellow 
members of the crowd gathered round the pitch, he was waving his 
hands in sharp movements across his face, ducking down behind 
some people, leaping up behind others, then standing still and 
blinking a lot. After a moment or two of this he started to stalk 
forward slowly and stealthily wearing a puzzled frown of 
concentration, like a leopard that's not sure whether it's just seen a 
half`empty tin of cat food half a mile away across a hot and dusty 
plain. 
"This isn't my bag either," said Arthur suddenly. 
Ford's spell of concentration was broken. He turned angrily on 
Arthur. 
"I wasn't talking about my towel," said Arthur. "We've established 
that that isn't mine. It's just that the bag into which I was putting the 
towel which is not mine is also not mine, though it is extraordinarily 
similar. Now personally I think that that is extremely odd, especially 
as the bag was one I made myself on prehistoric Earth. These are also 
not my stones," he added, pulling a few flat grey stones out of the bag. 
"I was making a collection of interesting stones and these are clearly 
very dull ones." 
A roar of excitement thrilled through the crowd and obliterated 
whatever it was that Ford said in reply to this piece of information. 
The cricket ball which had excited this reaction fell out of the sky and 
dropped neatly into Arthur's mysterious rabbit`skin bag. 
"Now I would say that that was also a very curious event," said 
Arthur, rapidly closing the bag and pretending to look for the ball on 
the ground. 
"I don't think it's here," he said to the small boys who immediately 
clustered round him to join in the search, "it probably rolled off 
somewhere. Over there I expect." He pointed vaguely in the direction 
in which he wished they would push off. One of the boys looked at 
him quizzically. 
"You all right?" said the boy. 
"No," said Arthur. 
"Then why you got a bone in your beard?" said the boy. 
"I'm training it to like being wherever it's put." Arthur prided
himself on saying this. It was, he thought, exactly the sort of thing 
which would entertain and stimulate young minds. 
"Oh," said the small boy, putting his head to one side and thinking 
about it. "What's your name?" 
"Dent," said Arthur, "Arthur Dent." 
"You're a jerk, Dent," said the boy, "a complete asshole." The boy 
looked past him at something else, to show that he wasn't in any 
particular hurry to run away, and then wandered off scratching his 
nose. Suddenly Arthur remembered that the Earth was going to be 
demolished again in two days' time, and just this once didn't feel too 
bad about it. 
Play resumed with a new ball, the sun continued to shine and Ford 
continued to jump up and down shaking his head and blinking. 
"Something's on your mind, isn't it?" said Arthur. 
"I think," said Ford in a tone of voice which Arthur by now 
recognized as one which presaged something utterly unintelligible, 
"that there's an SEP over there." 
He pointed. Curiously enough, the direction he pointed in was not 
the one in which he was looking. Arthur looked in the one direction, 
which was towards the sight`screens, and in the other which was at 
the field of play. He nodded, he shrugged. He shrugged again. 
"A what?" he said. 
"An SEP." 
"An S...?" 
"... EP." 
"And what's that?" 
"Somebody Else's Problem." 
"Ah, good," said Arthur and relaxed. He had no idea what all that 
was about, but at least it seemed to be over. It wasn't. 
"Over there," said Ford, again pointing at the sight`screens and 
looking at the pitch. 
"Where?" said Arthur. 
"There " said Ford. 
"I see," said Arthur, who didn't. 
"You do?" said Ford. 
"What?" said Arthur. 
"Can you see," said Ford patiently, "the SEP?" 
"I thought you said that was somebody else's problem." 
"That's right." 
Arthur nodded slowly, carefully and with an air of immense 
stupidity. 
"And I want to know," said Ford, "if you can see it." 
"You do?" 
"Yes." 
"What," said Arthur, "does it look like?" 
"Well, how should I know, you fool?" shouted Ford. "If you can see 
it, you tell me." 
Arthur experienced that dull throbbing sensation just behind the 
temples which was a hallmark of so many of his conversations with 
Ford. His brain lurked like a frightened puppy in its kennel. Ford took 
him by the arm. 
"An SEP," he said, "is something that we can't see, or don't see, or 
our brain doesn't let us see, because we think that it's somebody 
else's problem. That's what SEP means. Somebody Else's Problem. 
The brain just edits it out, it's like a blind spot. If you look at it directly 
you won't see it unless you know precisely what it is. Your only hope 
is to catch it by surprise out of the corner of your eye." 
"Ah," said Arthur, "then that's why..." 
"Yes," said Ford, who knew what Arthur was going to say. 
"... you've been jumping up and..." 
"Yes." 
"... down, and blinking..." 
"Yes." 
"... and..." 
"I think you've got the message." 
"I can see it," said Arthur, "it's a spaceship." 
For a moment Arthur was stunned by the reaction this revelation 
provoked. A roar erupted from the crowd, and from every direction 
people were running, shouting, yelling, tumbling over each other in a 
tumult of confusion. He stumbled back in astonishment and glanced 
fearfully around. Then he glanced around again in even greater 
astonishment. 
"Exciting, isn't it?" said an apparition. The apparition wobbled in 
front of Arthur's eyes, though the truth of the matter is probably that 
Arthur's eyes were wobbling in front of the apparition. His mouth 
wobbled as well. 
"W... w... w... w..." his mouth said. 
"I think your team have just won," said the apparition. 
"W... w... w... w..." repeated Arthur, and punctuated each wobble 
with a prod at Ford Prefect's back. Ford was staring at the tumult in 
trepidation. 
"You are English, aren't you?" said the apparition. 
"W... w... w... w... yes" said Arthur. 
"Well, your team, as I say, have just won. The match. It means they 
retain the Ashes. You must be very pleased. I must say, I'm rather 
fond of cricket, though I wouldn't like anyone outside this planet to 
hear me saying that. Oh dear no." 
The apparition gave what looked as if it might have been a 
mischievous grin, but it was hard to tell because the sun was directly 
behind him, creating a blinding halo round his head and illuminating 
his silver hair and beard in a way which was awesome, dramatic and 
hard to reconcile with mischievous grins. 
"Still," he said, "it'll all be over in a couple of days, won't it? Though 
as I said to you when we last met, I was very sorry about that. Still, 
whatever will have been, will have been." 
Arthur tried to speak, but gave up the unequal struggle. He 
prodded Ford again. 
"I thought something terrible had happened," said Ford, "but it's 
just the end of the game. We ought to get out. Oh, hello, 
Slartibartfast, what are you doing here?" 
"Oh, pottering, pottering," said the old man gravely. 
"That your ship? Can you give us a lift anywhere?" 
"Patience, patience," the old man admonished. 
"OK," said Ford. "It's just that this planet's going to be demolished 
pretty soon." 
"I know that," said Slartibartfast. 
"And, well, I just wanted to make that point," said Ford. 
"The point is taken." 
And if you feel that you really want to hang around a cricket pitch 
at this point..." 
"I do." 
"Then it's your ship." 
"It is." 
"I suppose." Ford turned away sharply at this point. 
"Hello, Slartibartfast," said Arthur at last. 
"Hello, Earthman," said Slartibartfast. 
"After all," said Ford, "we can only die once." 
The old man ignored this and stared keenly on to the pitch, with 
eyes that seemed alive with expressions that had no apparent bearing 
on what was happening out there. What was happening was that the 
crowd was gathering itself into a wide circle round the centre of the 
pitch. What Slartibartfast saw in it, he alone knew. 
Ford was humming something. It was just one note repeated at
intervals. He was hoping that somebody would ask him what he was 
humming, but nobody did. If anybody had asked him he would have 
said he was humming the first line of a Nöel Coward song called "Mad 
About the Boy" over and over again. It would then have been pointed 
out to him that he was only singing one note, to which he would have 
replied that for reasons which he hoped would be apparent, he was 
omitting the "about the boy" bit. He was annoyed that nobody asked. 
"It's just," he burst out at last, "that if we don't go soon, we might 
get caught in the middle of it all again. And there's nothing that 
depresses me more than seeing a planet being destroyed. Except 
possibly still being on it when it happens. Or," he added in an 
undertone, "hanging around cricket matches." 
"Patience," said Slartibartfast again. "Great things are afoot." 
"That's what you said last time we met," said Arthur. 
"They were," said Slartibartfast. 
"Yes, that's true," admitted Arthur. 
All, however, that seemed to be afoot was a ceremony of some 
kind. It was being specially staged for the benefit of tv rather than the 
spectators, and all they could gather about it from where they were 
standing was what they heard from a nearby radio. Ford was 
aggressively uninterested. 
He fretted as he heard it explained that the Ashes were about to be 
presented to the Captain of the English team out there on the pitch, 
fumed when told that this was because they had now won them for 
the nth time, positively barked with annoyance at the information 
that the Ashes were the remains of a cricket stump, and when, 
further to this, he was asked to contend with the fact that the cricket 
stump in question had been burnt in Melbourne, Australia, in 1882, to 
signify the "death of English cricket", he rounded on Slartibartfast, 
took a deep breath, but didn't have a chance to say anything because 
the old man wasn't there. He was marching out on to the pitch with 
terrible purpose in his gait, his hair, beard and robes swept behind 
him, looking very much as Moses would have looked if Sinai had been 
a well`cut lawn instead of, as it is more usually represented, a fiery 
smoking mountain. 
"He said to meet him at his ship," said Arthur. 
"What in the name of zarking fardwarks is the old fool doing?" 
exploded Ford. 
"Meeting us at his ship in two minutes," said Arthur with a shrug 
which indicated total abdication of thought. They started off towards 
it. Strange sounds reached their ears. They tried not to listen, but 
could not help noticing that Slartibartfast was querulously demanding 
that he be given the silver urn containing the Ashes, as they were, he 
said, "vitally important for the past, present and future safety of the 
Galaxy", and that this was causing wild hilarity. They resolved to 
ignore it. 
What happened next they could not ignore. With a noise like a 
hundred thousand people saying "wop", a steely white spaceship 
suddenly seemed to create itself out of nothing in the air directly 
above the cricket pitch and hung there with infinite menace and a 
slight hum. 
Then for a while it did nothing, as if it expected everybody to go 
about their normal business and not mind it just hanging there. 
Then it did something quite extraordinary. Or rather, it opened up 
and let something quite extraordinary come out of it, eleven quite 
extraordinary things. 
They were robots, white robots. 
What was most extraordinary about them was that they appeared 
to have come dressed for the occasion. Not only were they white, but 
they carried what appeared to be cricket bats, and not only that, but 
they also carried what appeared to be cricket balls, and not only that 
but they wore white ribbing pads round the lower parts of their legs. 
These last were extraordinary because they appeared to contain jets 
which allowed these curiously civilized robots to fly down from their 
hovering spaceship and start to kill people, which is what they did 
"Hello," said Arthur, "something seems to be happening." 
"Get to the ship," shouted Ford. "I don't want to know, I don't want 
to see, I don't want to hear," he yelled as he ran, "this is not my 
planet, I didn't choose to be here, I don't want to get involved, just 
get me out of here, and get me to a party, with people I can relate 
to " 
Smoke and flame billowed from the pitch. 
"Well, the supernatural brigade certainly seems to be out in force 
here today..." burbled a radio happily to itself. 
"What I need," shouted Ford, by way of clarifying his previous 
remarks, "is a strong drink and a peer`group." He continued to run, 
pausing only for a moment to grab Arthur's arm and drag him along 
with him. Arthur had adopted his normal crisis role, which was to 
stand with his mouth hanging open and let it all wash over him. 
"They're playing cricket," muttered Arthur, stumbling along after 
Ford. "I swear they are playing cricket. I do not know why they are 
doing this, but that is what they are doing. They're not just killing 
people, they're sending them up," he shouted, "Ford, they're sending 
us up " 
It would have been hard to disbelieve this without knowing a great 
deal more Galactic history than Arthur had so far managed to pick up 
in his travels. The ghostly but violent shapes that could be seen 
moving within the thick pall of smoke seemed to be performing a 
series of bizarre parodies of batting strokes, the difference being that 
every ball they struck with their bats exploded wherever it landed. 
The very first one of these had dispelled Arthur's initial reaction, that 
the whole thing might just be a publicity stunt by Australian 
margarine manufacturers. 
And then, as suddenly as it had all started, it was over. The eleven 
white robots ascended through the seething cloud in a tight 
formation, and with a few last flashes of flame entered the bowels of 
their hovering white ship, which, with the noise of a hundred 
thousand people saying "foop", promptly vanished into the thin air 
out of which it had wopped. 
For a moment there was a terrible stunned silence, and then out of 
the drifting smoke emerged the pale figure of Slartibartfast looking 
even more like Moses because in spite of the continued absence of 
the mountain he was at least now striding across a fiery and smoking 
well`mown lawn. 
He stared wildly about him until he saw the hurrying figures of 
Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect forcing their way through the frightened 
crowd which was for the moment busy stampeding in the opposite 
direction. The crowd was clearly thinking to itself about what an 
unusual day this was turning out to be, and not really knowing which 
way, if any, to turn. 
Slartibartfast was gesturing urgently at Ford and Arthur and 
shouting at them, as the three of them gradually converged on his 
ship, still parked behind the sight`screens and still apparently 
unnoticed by the crowd stampeding past it who presumably had 
enough of their own problems to cope with at that time. 
"They've garble warble farble " shouted Slartibartfast in his thin 
tremulous voice. 
"What did he say?" panted Ford as he elbowed his way onwards. 
Arthur shook his head. 
"'They've...' something or other," he said. 
"They've table warble farble " shouted Slartibartfast again. 
Ford and Arthur shook their heads at each other. 
"It sounds urgent," said Arthur. He stopped and shouted. 
"What?" 
"They've garble warble fashes " cried Slartibartfast, still waving at 
them. 
"He says," said Arthur, "that they've taken the Ashes. That is what I 
think he says." They ran on. 
"The...?" said Ford. 
"Ashes," said Arthur tersely. "The burnt remains of a cricket stump. 
It's a trophy. That..." he was panting, "is... apparently... what they... 
have come and taken." He shook his head very slightly as if he was 
trying to get his brain to settle down lower in his skull. 
"Strange thing to want to tell us," snapped Ford. 
"Strange thing to take." 
"Strange ship." 
They had arrived at it. The second strangest thing about the ship 
was watching the Somebody Else's Problem field at work. They could 
now clearly see the ship for what it was simply because they knew it 
was there. It was quite apparent, however, that nobody else could. 
This wasn't because it was actually invisible or anything hyper`
impossible like that. The technology involved in making anything 
invisible is so infinitely complex that nine hundred and ninety`nine 
thousand million, nine hundred and ninety`nine million, nine hundred 
and ninety`nine thousand, nine hundred and ninety`nine times out of 
a billion it is much simpler and more effective just to take the thing 
away and do without it. The ultra`famous sciento`magician Effrafax of 
Wug once bet his life that, given a year, he could render the great 
megamountain Magramal entirely invisible. 
Having spent most of the year jiggling around with immense Lux`O`
Valves and Refracto`Nullifiers and Spectrum`Bypass`O`Matics, he 
realized, with nine hours to go, that he wasn't going to make it.
So, he and his friends, and his friends' friends, and his friends' 
friends' friends, and his friends' friends' friends' friends, and some 
rather less good friends of theirs who happened to own a major 
stellar trucking company, put in what now is widely recognized as 
being the hardest night's work in history, and, sure enough, on the 
following day, Magramal was no longer visible. Effrafax lost his bet ʹ
and therefore his life ʹ simply because some pedantic adjudicating 
official noticed (a) that when walking around the area that Magramal 
ought to be he didn't trip over or break his nose on anything, and (b) 
a suspicious`looking extra moon. 
The Somebody Else's Problem field is much simpler and more 
effective, and what's more can be run for over a hundred years on a 
single torch battery. This is because it relies on people's natural 
disposition not to see anything they don't want to, weren't expecting, 
or can't explain. If Effrafax had painted the mountain pink and erected 
a cheap and simple Somebody Else's Problem field on it, then people 
would have walked past the mountain, round it, even over it, and 
simply never have noticed that the thing was there. 
And this is precisely what was happening with Slartibartfast's ship. 
It wasn't pink, but if it had been, that would have been the least of its 
visual problems and people were simply ignoring it like anything. 
The most extraordinary thing about it was that it looked only partly 
like a spaceship with guidance fins, rocket engines and escape 
hatches and so on, and a great deal like a small upended Italian bistro. 
Ford and Arthur gazed up at it with wonderment and deeply 
offended sensibilities. 
"Yes, I know," said Slartibartfast, hurrying up to them at that point, 
breathless and agitated, "but there is a reason. Come, we must go. 
The ancient nightmare is come again. Doom confronts us all. We must 
leave at once." 
"I fancy somewhere sunny," said Ford. 
Ford and Arthur followed Slartibartfast into the ship and were so 
perplexed by what they saw inside it that they were totally unaware 
of what happened next outside. 
A spaceship, yet another one, but this one sleek and silver, 
descended from the sky on to the pitch, quietly, without fuss, its long 
legs unlocking in a smooth ballet of technology. 
It landed gently. It extended a short ramp. A tall grey`green figure 
marched briskly out and approached the small knot of people who 
were gathered in the centre of the pitch tending to the casualties of 
the recent bizarre massacre. It moved people aside with quiet, 
understated authority, and came at last to a man lying in a desperate 
pool of blood, clearly now beyond the reach of any Earthly medicine, 
breathing, coughing his last. The figure knelt down quietly beside him. 
"Arthur Philip Deodat?" asked the figure. 
The man, with horrified confusion in eyes, nodded feebly. 
"You're a no`good dumbo nothing," whispered the creature. "I 
thought you should know that before you went." 
Important facts from Galactic history, number two: 
(Reproduced from the Siderial Daily Mentioner's Book of popular 
Galactic History.) 
Since this Galaxy began, vast civilizations have risen and fallen, 
risen and fallen, risen and fallen so often that it's quite tempting to 
think that life in the Galaxy must be: 
(a) something akin to seasick ʹ space`sick, time sick, history sick or 
some such thing, and 
(b) stupid. 
Chapter 4
It seemed to Arthur as if the whole sky suddenly just stood aside 
and let them through. 
It seemed to him that the atoms of his brain and the atoms of the 
cosmos were streaming through each other. 
It seemed to him that he was blown on the wind of the Universe, 
and that the wind was him. 
It seemed to him that he was one of the thoughts of the Universe 
and that the Universe was a thought of his. 
It seemed to the people at Lord's Cricket Ground that another 
North London restaurant had just come and gone as they so often do, 
and that this was Somebody Else's Problem. 
"What happened?" whispered Arthur in considerable awe. 
"We took off," said Slartibartfast. 
Arthur lay in startled stillness on the acceleration couch. He wasn't 
certain whether he had just got space`sickness or religion. 
"Nice mover," said Ford in an unsuccessful attempt to disguise the 
degree to which he had been impressed by what Slartibartfast's ship 
had just done, "shame about the decor." 
For a moment or two the old man didn't reply. He was staring at 
the instruments with the air of one who is trying to convert 
fahrenheit to centigrade in his head whilst his house is burning down. 
Then his brow cleared and he stared for a moment at the wide 
panoramic screen in front of him, which displayed a bewildering 
complexity of stars streaming like silver threads around them. 
His lips moved as if he was trying to spell something. Suddenly his 
eyes darted in alarm back to his instruments, but then his expression 
merely subsided into a steady frown. He looked back up at the screen. 
He felt his own pulse. His frown deepened for a moment, then he 
relaxed. 
"It's a mistake to try and understand mathematics," he said, "they 
only worry me. What did you say?" 
"Decor," said Ford. "Pity about it." 
"Deep in the fundamental heart of mind and Universe," said 
Slartibartfast, "there is a reason." 
Ford glanced sharply around. He clearly thought this was taking an 
optimistic view of things. 
The interior of the flight deck was dark green, dark red, dark brown, 
cramped and moodily lit. Inexplicably, the resemblance to a small 
Italian bistro had failed to end at the hatchway. Small pools of light 
picked out pot plants, glazed tiles and all sorts of little unidentifiable 
brass things. 
Rafia`wrapped bottles lurked hideously in the shadows. 
The instruments which had occupied Slartibartfast's attention 
seemed to be mounted in the bottom of bottles which were set in 
concrete. 
Ford reached out and touched it. 
Fake concrete. Plastic. Fake bottles set in fake concrete. 
The fundamental heart of mind and Universe can take a running 
jump, he thought to himself, this is rubbish. On the other hand, it 
could not be denied that the way the ship had moved made the Heart 
of Gold seem like an electric pram. 
He swung himself off the couch. He brushed himself down. He 
looked at Arthur who was singing quietly to himself. He looked at the 
screen and recognized nothing. He looked at Slartibartfast. 
"How far did we just travel?" he said. 
"About..." said Slartibartfast, "about two thirds of the way across 
the Galactic disc, I would say, roughly. Yes, roughly two thirds, I 
think." 
"It's a strange thing," said Arthur quietly, "that the further and 
faster one travels across the Universe, the more one's position in it 
seems to be largely immaterial, and one is filled with a profound, or 
rather emptied of a..." 
"Yes, very strange," said Ford. "Where are we going?" 
"We are going," said Slartibartfast, "to confront an ancient 
nightmare of the Universe." 
"And where are you going to drop us off?" 
"I will need your help." 
"Tough. Look, there's somewhere you can take us where we can 
have fun, I'm trying to think of it, we can get drunk and maybe listen 
to some extremely evil music. Hold on, I'll look it up." He dug out his 
copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and tipped through 
those parts of the index primarily concerned with sex and drugs and 
rock and roll. 
"A curse has arisen from the mists of time," said Slartibartfast. 
"Yes, I expect so," said Ford. "Hey," he said, lighting accidentally on 
one particular reference entry, "Eccentrica Gallumbits, did you ever 
meet her? The triple`breasted whore of Eroticon Six. Some people say 
her erogenous zones start some four miles from her actual body. Me, 
I disagree, I say five." 
"A curse," said Slartibartfast, "which will engulf the Galaxy in fire 
and destruction, and possibly bring the Universe to a premature 
doom. I mean it," he added. 
"Sounds like a bad time," said Ford, "with luck I'll be drunk enough 
not to notice. Here," he said, stabbing his finger at the screen of the 
Guide, "would be a really wicked place to go, and I think we should. 
What do you say, Arthur? Stop mumbling mantras and pay attention. 
There's important stuff you're missing here." 
Arthur pushed himself up from his couch and shook his head. 
"Where are we going?" he said. 
"To confront an ancient night ʹ " 
"Can it," said Ford. "Arthur, we are going out into the Galaxy to 
have some fun. Is that an idea you can cope with?" 
"What's Slartibartfast looking so anxious about?" said Arthur. 
"Nothing," said Ford. 
"Doom," said Slartibartfast. "Come," he added, with sudden 
authority, "there is much I must show and tell you." 
He walked towards a green wrought`iron spiral staircase set 
incomprehensibly in the middle of the flight deck and started to 
ascend. Arthur, with a frown, followed. 
Ford slung the Guide sullenly back into his satchel. 
"My doctor says that I have a malformed public`duty gland and a 
natural deficiency in moral fibre," he muttered to himself, "and that I 
am therefore excused from saving Universes." 
Nevertheless, he stomped up the stairs behind them. 
What they found upstairs was just stupid, or so it seemed, and Ford 
shook his head, buried his face in his hands and slumped against a pot 
plant, crushing it against the wall. 
"The central computational area," said Slartibartfast unperturbed, 
"this is where every calculation affecting the ship in any way is 
performed. Yes I know what it looks like, but it is in fact a complex 
four`dimensional topographical map of a series of highly complex 
mathematical functions." 
"It looks like a joke," said Arthur. 
"I know what it looks like," said Slartibartfast, and went into it. As 
he did so, Arthur had a sudden vague flash of what it might mean, but 
he refused to believe it. The Universe could not possibly work like that, 
he thought, cannot possibly. That, he thought to himself, would be as 
absurd as... he terminated that line of thinking. Most of the really 
absurd things he could think of had already happened. 
And this was one of them. 
It was a large glass cage, or box`in fact a room. 
In it was a table, a long one. Around it were gathered about a 
dozen chairs, of the bentwood style. On it was a tablecloth ʹ a grubby, 
red and white check tablecloth, scarred with the occasional cigarette 
burn, each, presumably, at a precise calculated mathematical position. 
And on the tablecloth sat some half`eaten Italian meals, hedged 
about with half`eaten breadsticks and half`drunk glasses of wine, and 
toyed with listlessly by robots. 
It was all completely artificial. The robot customers were attended 
by a robot waiter, a robot wine waiter and a robot maetre d'. The 
furniture was artificial, the tablecloth artificial, and each particular 
piece of food was clearly capable of exhibiting all the mechanical 
characteristics of, say, a pollo sorpreso, without actually being one. 
And all participated in a little dance together ʹ a complex routine 
involving the manipulation of menus, bill pads, wallets, cheque books, 
credit cards, watches, pencils and paper napkins, which seemed to be 
hovering constantly on the edge of violence, but never actually 
getting anywhere. 
Slartibartfast hurried in, and then appeared to pass the time of day 
quite idly with the maetre d', whilst one of the customer robots, an 
autorory, slid slowly under the table, mentioning what he intended to 
do to some guy over some girl. 
Slartibartfast took over the seat which had been thus vacated and 
passed a shrewd eye over the menu. The tempo of the routine round 
the table seemed somehow imperceptibly to quicken. Arguments 
broke out, people attempted to prove things on napkins. They waved 
fiercely at each other, and attempted to examine each other's pieces 
of chicken. The waiter's hand began to move on the bill pad more 
quickly than a human hand could manage, and then more quickly 
than a human eye could follow. The pace accelerated. Soon, an 
extraordinary and insistent politeness overwhelmed the group, and 
seconds later it seemed that a moment of consensus was suddenly 
achieved. A new vibration thrilled through the ship. 
Slartibartfast emerged from the glass room. 
"Bistromathics," he said. "The most powerful computational force 
known to parascience. Come to the Room of Informational Illusions." 
He swept past and carried them bewildered in his wake. 
Chapter 5
The Bistromatic Drive is a wonderful new method of crossing vast 
interstellar distances without all that dangerous mucking about with 
Improbability Factors. 
Bistromathics itself is simply a revolutionary new way of 
understanding the behaviour of numbers. Just as Einstein observed 
that time was not an absolute but depended on the observer's 
movement in space, and that space was not an absolute, but 
depended on the observer's movement in time, so it is now realized 
that numbers are not absolute, but depend on the observer's 
movement in restaurants. 
The first non`absolute number is the number of people for whom 
the table is reserved. This will vary during the course of the first three 
telephone calls to the restaurant, and then bear no apparent relation 
to the number of people who actually turn up, or to the number of 
people who subsequently join them after the show/match/party/gig, 
or to the number of people who leave when they see who else has 
turned up. 
The second non`absolute number is the given time of arrival, which 
is now known to be one of those most bizarre of mathematical 
concepts, a recipriversexcluson, a number whose existence can only 
be defined as being anything other than itself. In other words, the 
given time of arrival is the one moment of time at which it is 
impossible that any member of the party will arrive. 
Recipriversexclusons now play a vital part in many branches of maths, 
including statistics and accountancy and also form the basic equations 
used to engineer the Somebody Else's Problem field. 
The third and most mysterious piece of non`absoluteness of all lies 
in the relationship between the number of items on the bill, the cost 
of each item, the number of people at the table, and what they are 
each prepared to pay for. (The number of people who have actually 
brought any money is only a sub`phenomenon in this field.) 
The baffling discrepancies which used to occur at this point 
remained uninvestigated for centuries simply because no one took 
them seriously. They were at the time put down to such things as 
politeness, rudeness, meanness, flashness, tiredness, emotionality, or 
the lateness of the hour, and completely forgotten about on the 
following morning. They were never tested under laboratory 
conditions, of course, because they never occurred in laboratories ʹ
not in reputable laboratories at least. 
And so it was only with the advent of pocket computers that the 
startling truth became finally apparent, and it was this: 
Numbers written on restaurant bills within the confines of 
restaurants do not follow the same mathematical laws as numbers 
written on any other pieces of paper in any other parts of the 
Universe. 
This single fact took the scientific world by storm. It completely 
revolutionized it. So many mathematical conferences got held in such 
good restaurants that many of the finest minds of a generation died 
of obesity and heart failure and the science of maths was put back by 
years. 
Slowly, however, the implications of the idea began to be 
understood. To begin with it had been too stark, too crazy, too much 
what the man in the street would have said, "Oh yes, I could have told 
you that," about. Then some phrases like "Interactive Subjectivity 
Frameworks" were invented, and everybody was able to relax and get 
on with it. 
The small groups of monks who had taken up hanging around the 
major research institutes singing strange chants to the effect that the 
Universe was only a figment of its own imagination were eventually 
given a street theatre grant and went away. 
Chapter 6
"In space travel, you see," said Slartibartfast, as he fiddled with 
some instruments in the Room of Informational Illusions, "in space 
travel..." 
He stopped and looked about him. 
The Room of Informational Illusions was a welcome relief after the 
visual monstrosities of the central computational area. There was 
nothing in it. No information, no illusions, just themselves, white walls 
and a few small instruments which looked as if they were meant to 
plug into something which Slartibartfast couldn't find. 
"Yes?" urged Arthur. He had picked up Slartibartfast's sense of 
urgency but didn't know what to do with it. 
"Yes what?" said the old man.
"You were saying?" 
Slartibartfast looked at him sharply. 
"The numbers," he said, "are awful." He resumed his search. 
Arthur nodded wisely to himself. After a while he realized that this 
wasn't getting him anywhere and decided that he would say "what?"
after all. 
"In space travel," repeated Slartibartfast, "all the numbers are 
awful." 
Arthur nodded again and looked round to Ford for help, but Ford 
was practising being sullen and getting quite good at it. 
"I was only," said Slartibartfast with a sigh, "trying to save you the 
trouble of asking me why all the ship's computations were being done 
on a waiter's bill pad." 
Arthur frowned. 
"Why," he said, "were all the ship's computations being done on a 
wait ʹ " 
He stopped. 
Slartibartfast said, "Because in space travel all the numbers are 
awful." 
He could tell that he wasn't getting his point across. 
"Listen," he said. "On a waiter's bill pad numbers dance. You must 
have encountered the phenomenon." 
"Well..." 
"On a waiter's bill pad," said Slartibartfast, "reality and unreality 
collide on such a fundamental level that each becomes the other and 
anything is possible, within certain parameters." 
"What parameters?" 
"It's impossible to say," said Slartibartfast. "That's one of them. 
Strange but true. At least, I think it's strange," he added, "and I'm 
assured that it's true." 
At that moment he located the slot in the wall for which he had 
been searching, and clicked the instrument he was holding into it. 
"Do not be alarmed," he said, and then suddenly darted an 
alarmed look at himself, and lunged back, "it's..." 
They didn't hear what he said, because at that moment the ship 
winked out of existence around them and a starbattle`ship the size of 
a small Midlands industrial city plunged out of the sundered night 
towards them, star lasers ablaze. 
They gaped, pop`eyed, and were unable to scream. 
Chapter 7
Another world, another day, another dawn. 
The early morning's thinnest sliver of light appeared silently. 
Several billion trillion tons of superhot exploding hydrogen nuclei 
rose slowly above the horizon and managed to look small, cold and 
slightly damp. 
There is a moment in every dawn when light floats, there is the 
possibility of magic. Creation holds its breath. 
The moment passed as it regularly did on Squornshellous Zeta, 
without incident. 
The mist clung to the surface of the marshes. The swamp trees 
were grey with it, the tall reeds indistinct. It hung motionless like held 
breath. 
Nothing moved. 
There was silence. 
The sun struggled feebly with the mist, tried to impart a little 
warmth here, shed a little light there, but clearly today was going to 
be just another long haul across the sky. 
Nothing moved. 
Again, silence. 
Nothing moved. 
Silence. 
Very often on Squornshellous Zeta, whole days would go on like 
this, and this was indeed going to be one of them. 
Fourteen hours later the sun sank hopelessly beneath the opposite 
horizon with a sense of totally wasted effort. 
And a few hours later it reappeared, squared its shoulders and 
started on up the sky again. 
This time, however, something was happening. A mattress had just 
met a robot. 
"Hello, robot," said the mattress. 
"Bleah," said the robot and continued what it was doing, which was 
walking round very slowly in a very tiny circle. 
"Happy?" said the mattress. 
The robot stopped and looked at the mattress. It looked at it 
quizzically. It was clearly a very stupid mattress. It looked back at him 
with wide eyes. 
After what it had calculated to ten significant decimal places as 
being the precise length of pause most likely to convey a general 
contempt for all things mattressy, the robot continued to walk round 
in tight circles. 
"We could have a conversation," said the mattress, "would you like 
that?" 
It was a large mattress, and probably one of quite high quality. 
Very few things actually get manufactured these days, because in an 
infinitely large Universe such as, for instance, the one in which we live, 
most things one could possibly imagine, and a lot of things one would 
rather not, grow somewhere. A forest was discovered recently in 
which most of the trees grew ratchet screwdrivers as fruit. The life 
cycle of ratchet screwdriver fruit it quite interesting. Once picked it 
needs a dark dusty drawer in which it can lie undisturbed for years. 
Then one night it suddenly hatches, discards its outer skin which 
crumbles into dust, and emerges as a totally unidentifiable little metal 
object with flanges at both ends and a sort of ridge and a sort of hole 
for a screw. This, when found, will get thrown away. No one knows 
what it is supposed to gain from this. Nature, in her infinite wisdom, is 
presumably working on it. 
No one really knows what mattresses are meant to gain from their 
lives either. They are large, friendly, pocket`sprung creatures which 
live quiet private lives in the marshes of Squornshellous Zeta. Many of 
them get caught, slaughtered, dried out, shipped out and slept on. 
None of them seem to mind and all of them are called Zem. 
"No," said Marvin. 
"My name," said the mattress, "is Zem. We could discuss the 
weather a little." 
Marvin paused again in his weary circular plod. 
"The dew," he observed, "has clearly fallen with a particularly 
sickening thud this morning." 
He resumed his walk, as if inspired by this conversational outburst 
to fresh heights of gloom and despondency. He plodded tenaciously. 
If he had had teeth he would have gritted them at this point. He 
hadn't. He didn't. The mere plod said it all. 
The mattress flolloped around. This is a thing that only live 
mattresses in swamps are able to do, which is why the word is not in 
more common usage. It flolloped in a sympathetic sort of way, 
moving a fairish body of water as it did so. It blew a few bubbles up 
through the water engagingly. Its blue and white stripes glistened 
briefly in a sudden feeble ray of sun that had unexpectedly made it 
through the mist, causing the creature to bask momentarily. 
Marvin plodded. 
"You have something on your mind, I think," said the mattress 
floopily. 
"More than you can possibly imagine," dreaded Marvin. "My 
capacity for mental activity of all kinds is as boundless as the infinite 
reaches of space itself. Except of course for my capacity for 
happiness." 
Stomp, stomp, he went. 
"My capacity for happiness," he added, "you could fit into a 
matchbox without taking out the matches first." 
The mattress globbered. This is the noise made by a live, swamp`
dwelling mattress that is deeply moved by a story of personal tragedy. 
The word can also, according to the Ultra`Complete Maximegalon 
Dictionary of Every Language Ever, mean the noise made by the Lord 
High Sanvalvwag of Hollop on discovering that he has forgotten his 
wife's birthday for the second year running. Since there was only ever 
one Lord High Sanvalvwag of Hollop, and he never married, the word 
is only ever used in a negative or speculative sense, and there is an 
ever`increasing body of opinion which holds that the Ultra`Complete 
Maximegalon Dictionary is not worth the fleet of lorries it takes to 
cart its microstored edition around in. Strangely enough, the 
dictionary omits the word "floopily", which simply means "in the 
manner of something which is floopy". 
The mattress globbered again. 
"I sense a deep dejection in your diodes," it vollued (for the 
meaning of the word "vollue", buy a copy of Squornshellous 
Swamptalk at any remaindered bookshop, or alternatively buy the 
Ultra`Complete Maximegalon Dictionary, as the University will be very 
glad to get it off their hands and regain some valuable parking lots), 
"and it saddens me. You should be more mattresslike. We live quiet 
retired lives in the swamp, where we are content to flollop and vollue 
and regard the wetness in a fairly floopy manner. Some of us are 
killed, but all of us are called Zem, so we never know which and 
globbering is thus kept to a minimum. Why are you walking in 
circles?" 
"Because my leg is stuck," said Marvin simply. 
"It seems to me," said the mattress eyeing it compassionately, 
"that it is a pretty poor sort of leg." 
"You are right," said Marvin, "it is." 
"Voon," said the mattress. 
"I expect so," said Marvin, "and I also expect that you find the idea 
of a robot with an artificial leg pretty amusing. You should tell your 
friends Zem and Zem when you see them later; they'll laugh, if I know 
them, which I don't of course ʹ except insofar as I know all organic life 
forms, which is much better than I would wish to. Ha, but my life is 
but a box of wormgears." 
He stomped around again in his tiny circle, around his thin steel 
peg`leg which revolved in the mud but seemed otherwise stuck. 
"But why do you just keep walking round and round?" said the 
mattress. 
"Just to make the point," said Marvin, and continued, round and 
round. 
"Consider it made, my dear friend," flurbled the mattress, 
"consider it made." 
"Just another million years," said Marvin, "just another quick 
million. Then I might try it backwards. Just for the variety, you 
understand." 
The mattress could feel deep in his innermost spring pockets that 
the robot dearly wished to be asked how long he had been trudging in 
this futile and fruitless manner, and with another quiet flurble he did 
so. 
"Oh, just over the one`point`five`million mark, just over," said 
Marvin airily. "Ask me if I ever get bored, go on, ask me." 
The mattress did. 
Marvin ignored the question, he merely trudged with added 
emphasis. 
"I gave a speech once," he said suddenly, and apparently 
unconnectedly. "You may not instantly see why I bring the subject up, 
but that is because my mind works so phenomenally fast, and I am at 
a rough estimate thirty billion times more intelligent than you. Let me 
give you an example. Think of a number, any number." 
"Er, five," said the mattress. 
"Wrong," said Marvin. "You see?" 
The mattress was much impressed by this and realized that it was 
in the presence of a not unremarkable mind. It willomied along its 
entire length, sending excited little ripples through its shallow algae`
covered pool. 
It gupped. 
"Tell me," it urged, "of the speech you once made, I long to hear 
it." 
"It was received very badly," said Marvin, "for a variety of reasons. 
I delivered it," he added, pausing to make an awkward humping sort 
of gesture with his not`exactly`good arm, but his arm which was 
better than the other one which was dishearteningly welded to his 
left side, "over there, about a mile distance." 
He was pointing as well as he could manage, and he obviously 
wanted to make it totally clear that this was as well as he could 
manage, through the mist, over the reeds, to a part of the marsh 
which looked exactly the same as every other part of the marsh. 
"There," he repeated. "I was somewhat of a celebrity at the time." 
Excitement gripped the mattress. It had never heard of speeches 
being delivered on Squornshellous Zeta, and certainly not by 
celebrities. Water spattered off it as a thrill glurried across its back. 
It did something which mattresses very rarely bother to do. 
Summoning every bit of its strength, it reared its oblong body, heaved 
it up into the air and held it quivering there for a few seconds whilst it 
peered through the mist over the reeds at the part of the marsh 
which Marvin had indicated, observing, without disappointment, that 
it was exactly the same as every other part of the marsh. The effort 
was too much, and it flodged back into its pool, deluging Marvin with 
smelly mud, moss and weeds. 
"I was a celebrity," droned the robot sadly, "for a short while on 
account of my miraculous and bitterly resented escape from a fate 
almost as good as death in the heart of a blazing sun. You can guess 
from my condition," he added, "how narrow my escape was. I was 
rescued by a scrap`metal merchant, imagine that. Here I am, brain the 
size of... never mind." 
He trudged savagely for a few seconds. 
"He it was who fixed me up with this leg. Hateful, isn't it? He sold 
me to a Mind Zoo. I was the star exhibit. I had to sit on a box and tell 
my story whilst people told me to cheer up and think positive. 'Give 
us a grin, little robot,' they would shout at me, 'give us a little 
chuckle.' I would explain to them that to get my face to grin would 
take a good couple of hours in a workshop with a wrench, and that 
went down very well." 
"The speech," urged the mattress. "I long to hear of the speech you 
gave in the marshes." 
"There was a bridge built across the marshes. A cyberstructured 
hyperbridge, hundreds of miles in length, to carry ion`buggies and 
freighters over the swamp." 
"A bridge?" quirruled the mattress. "Here in the swamp?" 
"A bridge," confirmed Marvin, "here in the swamp. It was going to 
revitalize the economy of the Squornshellous System. They spent the 
entire economy of the Squornshellous System building it. They asked 
me to open it. Poor fools." 
It began to rain a little, a fine spray slid through the mist. 
"I stood on the platform. For hundreds of miles in front of me, and 
hundreds of miles behind me, the bridge stretched." 
"Did it glitter?" enthused the mattress. 
"It glittered." 
"Did it span the miles majestically?" 
"It spanned the miles majestically." 
"Did it stretch like a silver thread far out into the invisible mist?" 
"Yes," said Marvin. "Do you want to hear this story?" 
"I want to hear your speech," said the mattress. 
"This is what I said. I said, 'I would like to say that it is a very great 
pleasure, honour and privilege for me to open this bridge, but I can't 
because my lying circuits are all out of commission. I hate and despise 
you all. I now declare this hapless cyberstructure open to the 
unthinkable abuse of all who wantonly cross her.' And I plugged 
myself into the opening circuits." 
Marvin paused, remembering the moment. 
The mattress flurred and glurried. It flolloped, gupped and 
willomied, doing this last in a particularly floopy way. 
"Voon," it wurfed at last. "And it was a magnificent occasion?" 
"Reasonably magnificent. The entire thousand`mile`long bridge 
spontaneously folded up its glittering spans and sank weeping into 
the mire, taking everybody with it." 
There was a sad and terrible pause at this point in the conversation 
during which a hundred thousand people seemed unexpectedly to say 
"wop" and a team of white robots descended from the sky like 
dandelion seeds drifting on the wind in tight military formation. For a 
sudden violent moment they were all there, in the swamp, wrenching 
Marvin's false leg off, and then they were gone again in their ship, 
which said "foop". 
"You see the sort of thing I have to contend with?" said Marvin to 
the gobbering mattress. 
Suddenly, a moment later, the robots were back again for another 
violent incident, and this time when they left, the mattress was alone 
in the swamp. He flolloped around in astonishment and alarm. He 
almost lurgled in fear. He reared himself to see over the reeds, but 
there was nothing to see, just more reeds. He listened, but there was 
no sound on the wind beyond the now familiar sound of half`crazed 
etymologists calling distantly to each other across the sullen mire. 
Chapter 8
The body of Arthur Dent span. 
The Universe shattered into a million glittering fragments around it, 
and each particular shard span silently through the void, reflecting on 
its silver surface some single searing holocaust of fire and destruction. 
And then the blackness behind the Universe exploded, and each 
particular piece of blackness was the furious smoke of hell. 
And the nothingness behind the blackness behind the Universe 
erupted, and behind the nothingness behind the blackness behind the 
shattered Universe was at last the dark figure of an immense man 
speaking immense words. 
"These, then," said the figure, speaking from an immensely 
comfortable chair, "were the Krikkit Wars, the greatest devastation 
ever visited upon our Galaxy. What you have experienced..." 
Slartibartfast floated past, waving. 
"It's just a documentary," he called out. "This is not a good bit. 
Terribly sorry, trying to find the rewind control..." 
"... is what billions of billions of innocent..." 
"Do not," called out Slartibartfast floating past again, and fiddling 
furiously with the thing that he had stuck into the wall of the Room of 
Informational Illusions and which was in fact still stuck there, "agree 
to buy anything at this point." 
"... people, creatures, your fellow beings..." 
Music swelled ʹ again, it was immense music, immense chords. 
And behind the man, slowly, three tall pillars began to emerge out of 
the immensely swirling mist. 
"... experienced, lived through ʹ or, more often, failed to live 
through. Think of that, my friends. And let us not forget ʹ and in just a 
moment I shall be able to suggest a way which will help us always to 
remember ʹ that before the Krikkit Wars, the Galaxy was that rare 
and wonderful thing a happy Galaxy " 
The music was going bananas with immensity at this point. 
"A Happy Galaxy, my friends, as represented by the symbol of the 
Wikkit Gate " 
The three pillars stood out clearly now, three pillars topped with 
two cross pieces in a way which looked stupefyingly familiar to 
Arthur's addled brain. 
"The three pillars," thundered the man. "The Steel Pillar which 
represented the Strength and Power of the Galaxy " 
Searchlights seared out and danced crazy dances up and down the 
pillar on the left which was, clearly, made of steel or something very 
like it. The music thumped and bellowed. 
"The Perspex Pillar," announced the man, "representing the forces 
of Science and Reason in the Galaxy " 
Other searchlights played exotically up and down the righthand, 
transparent pillar creating dazzling patterns within it and a sudden 
inexplicable craving for ice`cream in the stomach of Arthur Dent. 
"And," the thunderous voice continued, "the Wooden Pillar, 
representing..." and here his voice became just very slightly hoarse 
with wonderful sentiments, "the forces of Nature and Spirituality." 
The lights picked out the central pillar. The music moved bravely up 
into the realms of complete unspeakability. 
"Between them supporting," the voice rolled on, approaching its 
climax, "the Golden Bail of Prosperity and the Silver Bail of Peace " 
The whole structure was now flooded with dazzling lights, and the 
music had now, fortunately, gone far beyond the limits of the 
discernible. At the top of the three pillars the two brilliantly gleaming 
bails sat and dazzled. There seemed to be girls sitting on top of them, 
or maybe they were meant to be angels. Angels are usually 
represented as wearing more than that, though. 
Suddenly there was a dramatic hush in what was presumably 
meant to be the Cosmos, and a darkening of the lights. 
"There is not a world," thrilled the man's expert voice, "not a 
civilized world in the Galaxy where this symbol is not revered even 
today. Even in primitive worlds it persists in racial memories. This it 
was that the forces of Krikkit destroyed, and this it is that now locks 
their world away till the end of eternity " 
And with a flourish, the man produced in his hands a model of the 
Wikkit gate. Scale was terribly hard to judge in this whole 
extraordinary spectacle, but the model looked as if it must have been 
about three feet high. 
"Not the original key, of course. That, as everyone knows, was 
destroyed, blasted into the ever`whirling eddies of the space`time 
continuum and lost for ever. This is a remarkable replica, hand`tooled 
by skilled craftsmen, lovingly assembled using ancient craft secrets 
into a memento you will be proud to own, in memory of those who 
fell, and in tribute to the Galaxy ʹ our Galaxy ʹ which they died to 
defend..." 
Slartibartfast floated past again at this moment. 
"Found it," he said. "We can lose all this rubbish. Just don't nod, 
that's all." 
"Now, let us bow our heads in payment," intoned the voice, and 
then said it again, much faster and backwards. 
Lights came and went, the pillars disappeared, the man gabled 
himself backwards into nothing, the Universe snappily reassembled 
itself around them. 
"You get the gist?" said Slartibartfast. 
"I'm astonished," said Arthur, "and bewildered." 
"I was asleep," said Ford, who floated into view at this point. "Did I 
miss anything?" 
They found themselves once again teetering rather rapidly on the 
edge of an agonizingly high cliff. The wind whipped out from their 
faces and across a bay on which the remains of one of the greatest 
and most powerful space battle`fleets ever assembled in the Galaxy 
was briskly burning itself back into existence. The sky was a sullen 
pink, darkening via a rather curious colour to blue and upwards to 
black. Smoke billowed down out of it at an incredible lick. 
Events were now passing back by them almost too quickly to be 
distinguished, and when, a short while later, a huge starbattle`ship 
rushed away from them as if they'd said "boo", they only just 
recognized it as the point at which they had come in. 
But now things were too rapid, a video`tactile blur which brushed 
and jiggled them through centuries of galactic history, turning, 
twisting, flickering. The sound was a mere thin thrill. 
Periodically through the thickening jumble of events they sensed 
appalling catastrophes, deep horrors, cataclysmic shocks, and these 
were always associated with certain recurring images, the only images 
which ever stood out clearly from the avalance of tumbling history: a 
wicket gate, a small hard red ball, hard white robots, and also 
something less distinct, something dark and cloudy. 
But there was also another sensation which rose clearly out of the 
thrilling passage of time. 
Just as a slow series of clicks when speeded up will lose the 
definition of each individual click and gradually take on the quality of 
a sustained and rising tone, so a series of individual impressions here 
took on the quality of a sustained emotion ʹ and yet not an emotion. 
If it was an emotion, it was a totally emotionless one. It was hatred, 
implacable hatred. It was cold, not like ice is cold, but like a wall is 
cold. It was impersonal, not as a randomly flung fist in a crowd is 
impersonal, but like a computer`issued parking summons is 
impersonal. And it was deadly ʹ again, not like a bullet or a knife is 
deadly, but like a brick wall across a motorway is deadly. 
And just as a rising tone will change in character and take on 
harmonics as it rises, so again, this emotionless emotion seemed to 
rise to an unbearable if unheard scream and suddenly seemed to be a 
scream of guilt and failure. 
And suddenly it stopped. 
They were left standing on a quiet hilltop on a tranquil evening. 
The sun was setting. 
All around them softly undulating green countryside rolled off 
gently into the distance. Birds sang about what they thought of it all, 
and the general opinion seemed to be good. A little way away could 
be heard the sound of children playing, and a little further away than 
the apparent source of that sound could be seen in the dimming 
evening light the outlines of a small town. 
The town appeared to consist mostly of fairly low buildings made 
of white stone. The skyline was of gentle pleasing curves. 
The sun had nearly set. 
As if out of nowhere, music began. Slartibartfast tugged at a switch 
and it stopped. 
A voice said, "This..." Slartibartfast tugged at a switch and it 
stopped. 
"I will tell you about it," he said quietly. 
The place was peaceful. Arthur felt happy. Even Ford seemed 
cheerful. They walked a short way in the direction of the town, and 
the Informational Illusion of the grass was pleasant and springy under 
their feet, and the Informational Illusion of the flowers smelt sweet 
and fragrant. Only Slartibartfast seemed apprehensive and out of 
sorts. 
He stopped and looked up. 
It suddenly occurred to Arthur that, coming as this did at the end, 
so to speak, or rather the beginning of all the horror they had just 
blurredly experienced, something nasty must be about to happen. He 
was distressed to think that something nasty could happen to 
somewhere as idyllic as this. He too glanced up. There was nothing in 
the sky. 
"They're not about to attack here, are they?" he said. He realized 
that this was merely a recording he was walking through, but he still 
felt alarmed. 
"Nothing is about to attack here," said Slartibartfast in a voice 
which unexpectedly trembled with emotion. "This is where it all 
started. This is the place itself. This is Krikkit." 
He stared up into the sky. 
The sky, from one horizon to another, from east to west, from 
north to south, was utterly and completely black. 
Chapter 9
Stomp stomp. 
Whirrr. 
"Pleased to be of service." 
"Shut up." 
"Thank you." 
Stomp stomp stomp stomp stomp. 
Whirrr. 
"Thank you for making a simple door very happy." 
"Hope your diodes rot." 
"Thank you. Have a nice day." 
Stomp stomp stomp stomp. 
Whirrr. 
"It is my pleasure to open for you..." 
"Zark off." 
"... and my satisfaction to close again with the knowledge of a job 
well done." 
"I said zark off." 
"Thank you for listening to this message." 
Stomp stomp stomp stomp. 
"Wop." 
Zaphod stopped stomping. He had been stomping around the 
Heart of Gold for days, and so far no door had said "wop" to him. He 
was fairly certain that no door had said "wop" to him now. It was not 
the sort of thing doors said. Too concise. Furthermore, there were not 
enough doors. It sounded as if a hundred thousand people had said 
"wop", which puzzled him because he was the only person on the ship. 
It was dark. Most of the ship's non`essential systems were closed 
down. It was drifting in a remote area of the Galaxy, deep in the inky 
blackness of space. So which particular hundred thousand people 
would turn up at this point and say a totally unexpected "wop"? 
He looked about him, up the corridor and down the corridor. It was 
all in deep shadow. There were just the very dim pinkish outlines of 
the doors which glowed in the dark and pulsed whenever they spoke, 
though he had tried every way he could think of stopping them. 
The lights were off so that his heads could avoid looking at each 
other, because neither of them was currently a particularly engaging 
sight, and nor had they been since he had made the error of looking 
into his soul. 
It had indeed been an error. It had been late one night ʹ of course. 
It had been a difficult day ʹ of course. 
There had been soulful music playing on the ship's sound system ʹ
of course. 
And he had, of course, been slightly drunk. 
In other words, all the usual conditions which bring on a bout of 
soul`searching had applied, but it had, nevertheless, clearly been an 
error. 
Standing now, silent and alone in the dark corridor he remembered 
the moment and shivered. His one head looked one way and his other 
the other and each decided that the other was the way to go. 
He listened but could hear nothing. 
All there had been was the "wop". 
It seemed an awfully long way to bring an awfully large number of 
people just to say one word. 
He started nervously to edge his way in the direction of the bridge. 
There at least he would feel in control. He stopped again. The way he 
was feeling he didn't think he was an awfully good person to be in 
control. 
The first shock of that moment, thinking back, had been 
discovering that he actually had a soul. 
In fact he'd always more or less assumed that he had one as he had 
a full complement of everything else, and indeed two of somethings, 
but suddenly actually to encounter the thing lurking there deep 
within him had giving him a severe jolt. 
And then to discover (this was the second shock) that it wasn't the 
totally wonderful object which he felt a man in his position had a 
natural right to expect had jolted him again. 
Then he had thought about what his position actually was and the 
renewed shock had nearly made him spill his drink. He drained it 
quickly before anything serious happened to it. He then had another 
quick one to follow the first one down and check that it was all right. 
"Freedom," he said aloud. 
Trillian came on to the bridge at that point and said several 
enthusiastic things on the subject of freedom. 
"I can't cope with it," he said darkly, and sent a third drink down to 
see why the second hadn't yet reported on the condition of the first.
He looked uncertainly at both of her and preferred the one on the 
right. 
He poured a drink down his other throat with the plan that it would 
head the previous one off at the pass, join forces with it, and together 
they would get the second to pull itself together. Then all three would 
go off in search of the first, give it a good talking to and maybe a bit of 
a sing as well. 
He felt uncertain as to whether the fourth drink had understood all 
that, so he sent down a fifth to explain the plan more fully and a sixth 
for moral support. 
"You're drinking too much," said Trillian. 
His heads collided trying to sort out the four of her he could now 
see into a whole position. He gave up and looked at the navigation 
screen and was astonished to see a quite phenomenal number of 
stars. 
"Excitement and adventure and really wild things," he muttered. 
"Look," she said in a sympathetic tone of voice, and sat down near 
him, "it's quite understandable that you're going to feel a little 
aimless for a bit." 
He boggled at her. He had never seen anyone sit on their own lap 
before. 
"Wow," he said. He had another drink. 
"You've finished the mission you've been on for years." 
"I haven't been on it. I've tried to avoid being on it." 
"You've still finished it." 
He grunted. There seemed to be a terrific party going on in his 
stomach. 
"I think it finished me," he said. "Here I am, Zaphod Beeblebrox, I 
can go anywhere, do anything. I have the greatest ship in the know 
sky, a girl with whom things seem to be working out pretty well..." 
"Are they?" 
"As far as I can tell I'm not an expert in personal relationships..." 
Trillian raised her eyebrows. 
"I am," he added, "one hell of a guy, I can do anything I want only I 
just don't have the faintest idea what." 
He paused. 
"One thing," he further added, "has suddenly ceased to lead to 
another" ʹ in contradiction of which he had another drink and slid 
gracelessly off his chair. 
Whilst he slept it off, Trillian did a little research in the ship's copy 
of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It had some advice to offer on 
drunkenness. 
"Go to it," it said, "and good luck." 
It was cross`referenced to the entry concerning the size of the 
Universe and ways of coping with that. 
Then she found the entry on Han Wavel, an exotic holiday planet, 
and one of the wonders of the Galaxy. 
Han Wavel is a world which consists largely of fabulous ultra`luxury 
hotels and casinos, all of which have been formed by the natural 
erosion of wind and rain. 
The chances of this happening are more or less one to infinity 
against. Little is known of how this came about because none of the 
geophysicists, probability statisticians, meteoranalysts or 
bizzarrologists who are so keen to research it can afford to stay there. 
Terrific, thought Trillian to herself, and within a few hours the great 
white running`shoe ship was slowly powering down out of the sky 
beneath a hot brilliant sun towards a brightly coloured sandy 
spaceport. The ship was clearly causing a sensation on the ground, 
and Trillian was enjoying herself. She heard Zaphod moving around 
and whistling somewhere in the ship. 
"How are you?" she said over the general intercom. 
"Fine," he said brightly, "terribly well." 
"Where are you?" 
"In the bathroom." 
"What are you doing?" 
"Staying here." 
After an hour or two it became plain that he meant it and the ship 
returned to the sky without having once opened its hatchway. 
"Heigh ho," said Eddie the Computer. 
Trillian nodded patiently, tapped her fingers a couple of times and 
pushed the intercom switch. 
"I think that enforced fun is probably not what you need at this 
point." 
"Probably not," replied Zaphod from wherever he was. 
"I think a bit of physical challenge would help draw you out of 
yourself." 
"Whatever you think, I think," said Zaphod. 
"RECREATIONAL IMPOSSIBILITIES" was a heading which caught 
Trillian's eye when, a short while later, she sat down to flip through 
the Guide again, and as the Heart of Gold rushed at improbable 
speeds in an indeterminate direction, she sipped a cup of something 
undrinkable from the Nutrimatic Drink Dispenser and read about how 
to fly. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has this to say on the subject 
of flying. 
There is an art, it says, or rather a knack to flying. 
The knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground and 
miss. 
Pick a nice day, it suggests, and try it.
The first part is easy. 
All it requires is simply the ability to throw yourself forward with all 
your weight, and the willingness not to mind that it's going to hurt. 
That is, it's going to hurt if you fail to miss the ground. 
Most people fail to miss the ground, and if they are really trying 
properly, the likelihood is that they will fail to miss it fairly hard. 
Clearly, it's the second point, the missing, which presents the 
difficulties. 
One problem is that you have to miss the ground accidentally. It's 
no good deliberately intending to miss the ground because you won't. 
You have to have your attention suddenly distracted by something 
else when you're halfway there, so that you are no longer thinking 
about falling, or about the ground, or about how much it's going to 
hurt if you fail to miss it. 
It is notoriously difficult to prise your attention away from these 
three things during the split second you have at your disposal. Hence 
most people's failure, and their eventual disillusionment with this 
exhilarating and spectacular sport. 
If, however, you are lucky enough to have your attention 
momentarily distracted at the crucial moment by, say, a gorgeous pair 
of legs (tentacles, pseudopodia, according to phyllum and/or personal
inclination) or a bomb going off in your vicinity, or by suddenly 
spotting an extremely rare species of beetle crawling along a nearby 
twig, then in your astonishment you will miss the ground completely 
and remain bobbing just a few inches above it in what might seem to 
be a slightly foolish manner. 
This is a moment for superb and delicate concentration. 
Bob and float, float and bob. 
Ignore all considerations of your own weight and simply let 
yourself waft higher. 
Do not listen to what anybody says to you at this point because 
they are unlikely to say anything helpful. 
They are most likely to say something along the lines of, "Good God, 
you can't possibly be flying " 
It is vitally important not to believe them or they will suddenly be 
right. 
Waft higher and higher. 
Try a few swoops, gentle ones at first, then drift above the treetops 
breathing regularly. 
DO NOT WAVE AT ANYBODY. 
When you have done this a few times you will find the moment of 
distraction rapidly becomes easier and easier to achieve. 
You will then learn all sorts of things about how to control your 
flight, your speed, your manoeuvrability, and the trick usually lies in 
not thinking too hard about whatever you want to do, but just 
allowing it to happen as if it was going to anyway. 
You will also learn how to land properly, which is something you 
will almost certainly cock up, and cock up badly, on your first attempt. 
There are private flying clubs you can join which help you achieve 
the all`important moment of distraction. They hire people with 
surprising bodies or opinions to leap out from behind bushes and 
exhibit and/or explain them at the crucial moments. Few genuine 
hitch`hikers will be able to afford to join these clubs, but some may 
be able to get temporary employment at them. 
Trillian read this longingly, but reluctantly decided that Zaphod 
wasn't really in the right frame of mind for attempting to fly, or for 
walking through mountains or for trying to get the Brantisvogan Civil 
Service to acknowledge a change`of`address card, which were the 
other things listed under the heading "RECREATIONAL 
IMPOSSIBILITIES". 
Instead, she flew the ship to Allosimanius Syneca, a world of ice, 
snow, mind`hurtling beauty and stunning cold. The trek from the 
snow plains of Liska to the summit of the Ice Crystal Pyramids of 
Sastantua is long and gruelling, even with jet skis and a team of 
Syneca Snowhounds, but the view from the top, a view which takes in 
the Stin Glacier Fields, the shimmering Prism Mountains and the far 
ethereal dancing icelights, is one which first freezes the mind and 
then slowly releases it to hitherto unexperienced horizons of beauty, 
and Trillian, for one, felt that she could do with a bit of having her 
mind slowly released to hitherto unexperienced horizons of beauty. 
They went into a low orbit. 
There lay the silverwhite beauty of Allosimanius Syneca beneath 
them. 
Zaphod stayed in bed with one head stuck under a pillow and the 
other doing crosswords till late into the night. 
Trillian nodded patiently again, counted to a sufficiently high 
number, and told herself that the important thing now was just to get 
Zaphod talking. 
She prepared, by dint of deactivating all the robot kitchen 
synthomatics, the most fabulously delicious meal she could contrive ʹ
delicately oiled meals, scented fruits, fragrant cheeses, fine Aldebaran 
wines. 
She carried it through to him and asked if he felt like talking things 
through. 
"Zark off," said Zaphod. 
Trillian nodded patiently to herself, counted to an even higher 
number, tossed the tray lightly aside, walked to the transport room 
and just teleported herself the hell out of his life. 
She didn't even programme any coordinates, she hadn't the 
faintest idea where she was going, she just went ʹ a random row of 
dots flowing through the Universe. 
"Anything," she said to herself as she left, "is better than this." 
"Good job too," muttered Zaphod to himself, turned over and 
failed to go to sleep. 
The next day he restlessly paced the empty corridors of the ship, 
pretending not to look for her, though he knew she wasn't there. He 
ignored the computer's querulous demands to know just what the 
hell was going on around here by fitting a small electronic gag across
a pair of its terminals. 
After a while he began to turn down the lights. There was nothing 
to see. Nothing was about to happen. 
Lying in bed one night ʹ and night was now virtually continuous on 
the ship ʹ he decided to pull himself together, to get things into some 
kind of perspective. He sat up sharply and started to pull clothes on. 
He decided that there must be someone in the Universe feeling more 
wretched, miserable and forsaken than himself, and he determined to 
set out and find him. 
Halfway to the bridge it occurred to him that it might be Marvin, 
and he returned to bed. 
It was a few hours later than this, as he stomped disconsolately 
about the darkened corridors swearing at cheerful doors, that he 
heard the "wop" said, and it made him very nervous. 
He leant tensely against the corridor wall and frowned like a man 
trying to unbend a corkscrew by telekinesis. He laid his fingertips 
against the wall and felt an unusual vibration. And now he could quite 
clearly hear slight noises, and could hear where they were coming 
from ʹ they were coming from the bridge. 
"Computer?" he hissed. 
"Mmmm?" said the computer terminal nearest him, equally quietly. 
"Is there someone on this ship?" 
"Mmmmm," said the computer. 
"Who is it?" 
Mmmmm mmm mmmmm," said the computer. 
"What?" 
"Mmmmm mmmm mm mmmmmmmm." 
Zaphod buried one of his faces in two of his hands. 
"Oh, Zarquon," he muttered to himself. Then he stared up the 
corridor towards the entrance to the bridge in the dim distance from
which more and purposeful noises were coming, and in which the 
gagged terminals were situated. 
"Computer," he hissed again. 
"Mmmmm?" 
"When I ungag you..." 
"Mmmmm." 
"Remind me to punch myself in the mouth." 
"Mmmmm mmm?" 
"Either one. Now just tell me this. One for yes, two for no. Is it 
dangerous?" 
"Mmmmm." 
"It is?" 
"Mmmm." 
"You didn't just go 'mmmm' twice?" 
"Mmmm mmmm." 
"Hmmmm." 
He inched his way up the corridor as if he would rather be yarding 
his way down it, which was true. 
He was within two yards of the door to the bridge when he 
suddenly realized to his horror that it was going to be nice to him, and 
he stopped dead. He hadn't been able to turn off the doors' courtesy 
voice circuits. 
This doorway to the bridge was concealed from view within it 
because of the excitingly chunky way in which the bridge had been 
designed to curve round, and he had been hoping to enter 
unobserved. 
He leant despondently back against the wall again and said some 
words which his other head was quite shocked to hear. 
He peered at the dim pink outline of the door, and discovered that 
in the darkness of the corridor he could just about make out the 
Sensor Field which extended out into the corridor and told the door 
when there was someone there for whom it must open and to whom 
it must make a cheery and pleasant remark. 
He pressed himself hard back against the wall and edged himself 
towards the door, flattening his chest as much as he possibly could to 
avoid brushing against the very, very dim perimeter of the field. He 
held his breath, and congratulated himself on having lain in bed 
sulking for the last few days rather than trying to work out his feelings 
on chest expanders in the ship's gym. 
He then realized he was going to have to speak at this point. 
He took a series of very shallow breaths, and then said as quickly 
and as quietly as he could, "Door, if you can hear me, say so very, very 
quietly." 
Very, very quietly, the door murmured, "I can hear you." 
"Good. Now, in a moment, I'm going to ask you to open. When you 
open I do not want you to say that you enjoyed it, OK?" 
"OK." 
"And I don't want you to say to me that I have made a simple door 
very happy, or that it is your pleasure to open for me and your 
satisfaction to close again with the knowledge of a job well done, 
OK?" 
"OK." 
"And I do not want you to ask me to have a nice day, understand?" 
"I understand." 
"OK," said Zaphod, tensing himself, "open now." 
The door slid open quietly. Zaphod slipped quietly through. The 
door closed quietly behind him. 
"Is that the way you like it, Mr. Beeblebrox?" said the door out loud. 
"I want you to imagine," said Zaphod to the group of white robots 
who swung round to stare at him at that point, "that I have an 
extremely powerful Kill`O`Zap blaster pistol in my hand." 
There was an immensely cold and savage silence. The robots 
regarded him with hideously dead eyes. They stood very still. There 
was something intensely macabre about their appearance, especially 
to Zaphod who had never seen one before or even known anything 
about them. The Krikkit Wars belonged to the ancient past of the 
Galaxy, and Zaphod had spent most of his early history lessons 
plotting how he was going to have sex with the girl in the cybercubicle 
next to him, and since his teaching computer had been an integral 
part of this plot it had eventually had all its history circuits wiped and 
replaced with an entirely different set of ideas which had then 
resulted in it being scrapped and sent to a home for Degenerate 
Cybermats, whither it was followed by the girl who had inadvertently 
fallen deeply in love with the unfortunate machine, with the result (a) 
that Zaphod never got near her and (b) that he missed out on a period 
of ancient history that would have been of inestimable value to him at 
this moment. 
He stared at them in shock. 
It was impossible to explain why, but their smooth and sleek white 
bodies seemed to be the utter embodiment of clean, clinical evil. 
From their hideously dead eyes to their powerful lifeless feet, they 
were clearly the calculated product of a mind that wanted simply to 
kill. Zaphod gulped in cold fear. 
They had been dismantling part of the rear bridge wall, and had 
forced a passage through some of the vital innards of the ship. 
Through the tangled wreckage Zaphod could see, with a further and 
worse sense of shock, that they were tunnelling towards the very 
heart of the ship, the heart of the Improbability Drive that had been 
so mysteriously created out of thin air, the Heart of Gold itself. 
The robot closest to him was regarding him in such a way as to 
suggest that it was measuring every smallest particle of his body, 
mind and capability. And when it spoke, what it said seemed to bear 
this impression out. Before going on to what it actually said, it is 
worth recording at this point that Zaphod was the first living organic 
being to hear one of these creatures speak for something over ten 
billion years. If he had paid more attention to his ancient history 
lessons and less to his organic being, he might have been more 
impressed by this honour. 
The robot's voice was like its body, cold, sleek and lifeless. It had 
almost a cultured rasp to it. It sounded as ancient as it was. 
It said, "You do have a Kill`O`Zap blaster pistol in your hand." 
Zaphod didn't know what it meant for a moment, but then he 
glanced down at his own hand and was relieved to see that what he 
had found clipped to a wall bracket was indeed what he had thought 
it was. 
"Yeah," he said in a kind of relieved sneer, which is quite tricky, 
"well, I wouldn't want to overtax your imagination, robot." For a while 
nobody said anything, and Zaphod realized that the robots were 
obviously not here to make conversation, and that it was up to him. 
"I can't help noticing that you have parked your ship," he said with 
a nod of one of his heads in the appropriate direction, "through 
mine." 
There was no denying this. Without regard for any kind of proper 
dimensional behaviour they had simply materialized their ship 
precisely where they wanted it to be, which meant that it was simply 
locked through the Heart of Gold as if they were nothing more than 
two combs. 
Again, they made no response to this, and Zaphod wondered if the 
conversation would gather any momentum if he phrased his part of it 
in the form of questions. 
"... haven't you?" he added. 
"Yes," replied the robot." 
"Er, OK," said Zaphod. "So what are you cats doing here?" 
Silence. 
"Robots," said Zaphod, "what are you robots doing here?" 
"We have come," rasped the robot, "for the Gold of the Bail." 
Zaphod nodded. He waggled his gun to invite further elaboration. 
The robot seemed to understand this. 
"The Gold Bail is part of the Key we seek," continued the robot, "to 
release our Masters from Krikkit." 
Zaphod nodded again. He waggled his gun again. 
"The Key," continued the robot simply, "was disintegrated in time 
and space. The Golden Bail is embedded in the device which drives 
your ship. It will be reconstituted in the Key. Our Masters shall be 
released. The Universal Readjustment will continue." 
Zaphod nodded again. 
"What are you talking about?" he said. 
A slightly pained expression seemed to cross the robot's totally 
expressionless face. He seemed to be finding the conversation 
depressing. 
"Obliteration," it said. "We seek the Key," it repeated, "we already 
have the Wooden Pillar, the Steel Pillar and the Perspex Pillar. In a 
moment we will have the Gold Bail..." 
"No you won't." 
"We will," stated the robot. 
"No you won't. It makes my ship work." 
"In a moment," repeated the robot patiently, "we will have the 
Gold Bail..." 
"You will not," said Zaphod. 
"And then we must go," said the robot, in all seriousness, "to a 
party." 
"Oh," said Zaphod, startled. "Can I come?" 
"No," said the robot. "We are going to shoot you." 
"Oh yeah?" said Zaphod, waggling his gun. 
"Yes," said the robot, and they shot him. 
Zaphod was so surprised that they had to shoot him again before 
he fell down. 
Chapter 10
"Shhh," said Slartibartfast. "Listen and watch." 
Night had now fallen on ancient Krikkit. The sky was dark and 
empty. The only light was coming from the nearby town, from which 
pleasant convivial sounds were drifting quietly on the breeze. They 
stood beneath a tree from which heady fragrances wafted around 
them. Arthur squatted and felt the Informational Illusion of the soil 
and the grass. He ran it through his fingers. The soil seemed heavy 
and rich, the grass strong. It was hard to avoid the impression that 
this was a thoroughly delightful place in all respects. 
The sky was, however, extremely blank and seemed to Arthur to 
cast a certain chill over the otherwise idyllic, if currently invisible, 
landscape. Still, he supposed, it's a question of what you're used to. 
He felt a tap on his shoulder and looked up. Slartibartfast was 
quietly directing his attention to something down the other side of 
the hill. He looked and could just see some faint lights dancing and 
waving, and moving slowly in their direction. 
As they came nearer, sounds became audible too, and soon the 
dim lights and noises resolved themselves into a small group of 
people who were walking home across the hill towards the town. 
They walked quite near the watchers beneath the tree, swinging 
lanterns which made soft and crazy lights dance among the trees and 
grass, chattering contentedly, and actually singing a song about how 
terribly nice everything was, how happy they were, how much they 
enjoyed working on the farm, and how pleasant it was to be going 
home to see their wives and children, with a lilting chorus to the 
effect that the flowers were smelling particularly nice at this time of 
year and that it was a pity the dog had died seeing as it liked them so 
much. Arthur could almost imagine Paul McCartney sitting with his 
feet up by the fire on evening, humming it to Linda and wondering 
what to buy with the proceeds, and thinking probably Essex. 
"The Masters of Krikkit," breathed Slartibartfast in sepulchral tones. 
Coming, as it did, so hard upon the heels of his own thoughts about 
Essex this remark caused Arthur a moment's confusion. Then the logic 
of the situation imposed itself on his scattered mind, and he 
discovered that he still didn't understand what the old man meant. 
"What?" he said. 
"The Masters of Krikkit," said Slartibartfast again, and if his 
breathing had been sepulchral before, this time he sounded like 
someone in Hades with bronchitis. 
Arthur peered at the group and tried to make sense of what little 
information he had at his disposal at this point. 
The people in the group were clearly alien, if only because they 
seemed a little tall, thin, angular and almost as pale as to be white, 
but otherwise they appeared remarkably pleasant; a little whimsical 
perhaps, one wouldn't necessarily want to spend a long coach journey 
with them, but the point was that if they deviated in any way from 
being good straightforward people it was in being perhaps too nice 
rather than not nice enough. So why all this rasping lungwork from 
Slartibartfast which would seem more appropriate to a radio 
commercial for one of those nasty films about chainsaw operators 
taking their work home with them? 
Then, this Krikkit angle was a tough one, too. He hadn't quite 
fathomed the connection between what he knew as cricket, and 
what... 
Slartibartfast interrupted his train of thought at this point as if 
sensing what was going through his mind. 
"The game you know as cricket," he said, and his voice still seemed 
to be wandering lost in subterranean passages, "is just one of those 
curious freaks of racial memory which can keep images alive in the 
mind aeons after their true significance has been lost in the mists of 
time. Of all the races on the Galaxy, only the English could possibly 
revive the memory of the most horrific wars ever to sunder the 
Universe and transform it into what I'm afraid is generally regarded as 
an incomprehensibly dull and pointless game. 
"Rather fond of it myself," he added, "but in most people's eyes 
you have been inadvertently guilty of the most grotesque bad taste. 
Particularly the bit about the little red ball hitting the wicket, that's 
very nasty." 
"Um," said Arthur with a reflective frown to indicate that his 
cognitive synapses were coping with this as best as they could, "um." 
"And these," said Slartibartfast, slipping back into crypt guttural 
and indicating the group of Krikkit men who had now walked past 
them, "are the ones who started it all, and it will start tonight. Come, 
we will follow, and see why." 
They slipped out from underneath the tree, and followed the 
cheery party along the dark hill path. Their natural instinct was to 
tread quietly and stealthily in pursuit of their quarry, though, as they 
were simply walking through a recorded Informational Illusion, they 
could as easily have been wearing euphoniums and woad for all the 
notice their quarry would have taken of them. 
Arthur noticed that a couple of members of the party were now 
singing a different song. It came lilting back to them through the soft 
night air, and was a sweet romantic ballad which would have netted 
McCartney Kent and Essex and enabled him to put in a fair offer for 
Hampshire. 
"You must surely know," said Slartibartfast to Ford, "what it is that 
is about to happen?" 
"Me?" said Ford. "No." 
"Did you not learn Ancient Galactic History when you were a 
child?" 
"I was in the cybercubicle behind Zaphod," said Ford, "it was very 
distracting. Which isn't to say that I didn't learn some pretty stunning 
things." 
At this point Arthur noticed a curious feature to the song that the 
party were singing. The middle eight bridge, which would have had 
McCartney firmly consolidated in Winchester and gazing intently over 
the Test Valley to the rich pickings of the New Forest beyond, had 
some curious lyrics. The songwriter was referring to meeting with a 
girl not "under the moon" or "beneath the stars" but "above the 
grass", which struck Arthur a little prosaic. Then he looked up again at 
the bewildering black sky, and had the distinct feeling that there was 
an important point here, if only he could grasp what it was. It gave 
him a feeling of being alone in the Universe, and he said so. 
"No," said Slartibartfast, with a slight quickening of his step, "the 
people of Krikkit have never thought to themselves 'We are alone in 
the Universe.' They are surrounded by a huge Dust Cloud, you see, 
their single sun with its single world, and they are right out on the 
utmost eastern edge of the Galaxy. Because of the Dust Cloud there 
has never been anything to see in the sky. At night it is totally blank, 
During the day there is the sun, but you can't look directly at that so 
they don't. They are hardly aware of the sky. It's as if they had a blind 
spot which extended 180 degrees from horizon to horizon. 
"You see, the reason why they have never thought 'We are alone in 
the Universe' is that until tonight they don't know about the Universe. 
Until tonight." 
He moved on, leaving the words ringing in the air behind him. 
"Imagine," he said, "never even thinking 'We are alone' simply 
because it has never occurred to you to think that there's any other 
way to be." 
He moved on again. 
"I'm afraid this is going to be a little unnerving," he added. 
As he spoke, they became aware of a very thin roaring scream high 
up in the sightless sky above them. They glanced upwards in alarm, 
but for a moment or two could see nothing. 
Then Arthur noticed that the people in the party in front of them 
had heard the noise, but that none of them seemed to know what to 
do with it. They were glancing around themselves in consternation, 
left, right, forwards, backwards, even at the ground. It never occurred 
to them to look upwards. 
The profoundness of the shock and horror they emanated a few 
moments later when the burning wreckage of a spaceship came 
hurtling and screaming out of the sky and crashed about half a mile 
from where they were standing was something that you had to be 
there to experience. 
Some speak of the Heart of Gold in hushed tones, some of the 
Starship Bistromath. 
Many speak of the legendary and gigantic Starship Titanic, a 
majestic and luxurious cruise`liner launched from the great 
shipbuilding asteroid complexes of Artifactovol some hundreds of 
years ago now, and with good reason. 
It was sensationally beautiful, staggeringly huge, and more 
pleasantly equipped than any ship in what now remains of history 
(see note below on the Campaign for Real Time) but it had the 
misfortune to be built in the very earliest days of Improbability 
Physics, long before this difficult and cussed branch of knowledge was 
fully, or at all, understood. 
The designers and engineers decided, in their innocence, to build a 
prototype Improbability Field into it, which was meant, supposedly, to 
ensure that it was Infinitely Improbable that anything would ever go 
wrong with any part of the ship. 
They did not realize that because of the quasi`reciprocal and 
circular nature of all Improbability calculations, anything that was 
Infinitely Improbable was actually very likely to happen almost 
immediately. 
The Starship Titanic was a monstrously pretty sight as it lay 
beached like a silver Arcturan Megavoidwhale amongst the laser`lit 
tracery of its construction gantries, a brilliant cloud of pins and 
needles of light against the deep interstellar blackness; but when 
launched, it did not even manage to complete its very first radio 
message ʹ an SOS ʹ before undergoing a sudden and gratuitous total 
existence failure. 
However, the same event which saw the disastrous failure of one 
science in its infancy also witnessed the apotheosis of another. It was 
conclusively proven that more people watched the tri`d coverage of 
the launch than actually existed at the time, and this has now been 
recognized as the greatest achievement ever in the science of 
audience research. 
Another spectacular media event of that time was the supernova 
which the star Ysllodins underwent a few hours later. Ysllodins is the 
star around which most of the Galaxy's major insurance underwriters 
live, or rather lived. 
But whilst these spaceships, and other great ones which come to 
mind, such as the Galactic Fleet Battleships ʹ the GSS Daring, the GSS 
Audacy and the GSS Suicidal Insanity ʹ are all spoken of with awe, 
pride, enthusiasm, affection, admiration, regret, jealousy, resentment, 
in fact most of the better known emotions, the one which regularly 
commands the most actual astonishment was Krikkit One, the first 
spaceship ever built by the people of Krikkit. This is not because it was 
a wonderful ship. It wasn't. 
It was a crazy piece of near junk. It looked as if it had been knocked 
up in somebody's backyard, and this was in fact precisely where it had 
been knocked up. The astonishing thing about the ship was not that it 
was one well (it wasn't) but that it was done at all. The period of time 
which had elapsed between the moment that the people of Krikkit 
had discovered that there was such a thing as space and the 
launching of their first spaceship was almost exactly a year. 
Ford Prefect was extremely grateful, as he strapped himself in, that 
this was just another Informational Illusion, and that he was therefore 
completely safe. In real life it wasn't a ship he would have set foot in 
for all the rice wine in China. "Extremely rickety" was one phrase 
which sprang to mind, and "Please may I get out?" was another. 
"This is going to fly?" said Arthur, giving gaunt looks, at the lashed`
together pipework and wiring which festooned the cramped interior 
of the ship. 
Slartibartfast assured him that it would, that they were perfectly 
safe and that it was all going to be extremely instructive and not a 
little harrowing. 
Ford and Arthur decided just to relax and be harrowed. 
"Why not," said Ford, "go mad?" 
In front of them and, of course, totally unaware of their presence 
for the very good reason that they weren't actually there, were the 
three pilots. They had also constructed the ship. They had been on 
the hill path that night singing wholesome heartwarming songs. Their 
brains had been very slightly turned by the nearby crash of the alien 
spaceship. They had spent weeks stripping every tiniest last secret out 
of the wreckage of that burnt`up spaceship, all the while singing lilting 
spaceship`stripping ditties. They had then built their own ship and this 
was it. This was their ship, and they were currently singing a little 
song about that too, expressing the twin joys of achievement and 
ownership. The chorus was a little poignant, and told of their sorrow 
that their work had kept them such long hours in the garage, away 
from the company of their wives and children, who had missed them 
terribly but had kept them cheerful by bringing them continual stories 
of how nicely the puppy was growing up. 
Pow, they took off. 
They roared into the sky like a ship that knew precisely what it was 
doing. 
"No way," said Ford a while later after they had recovered from the 
shock of acceleration, and were climbing up out of the planet's 
atmosphere, "no way," he repeated, "does anyone design and build a 
ship like this in a year, no matter how motivated. I don't believe it. 
Prove it to me and I still won't believe it." He shook his head 
thoughtfully and gazed out of a tiny port at the nothingness outside it. 
The trip passed uneventfully for a while, and Slartibartfast 
fastwound them through it. 
Very quickly, therefore, they arrived at the inner perimeter of the 
hollow, spherical Dust Cloud which surrounded their sun and home 
planet, occupying, as it were, the next orbit out. 
It was more as if there was a gradual change in the texture and 
consistency of space. The darkness seemed now to thrum and ripple 
past them. It was a very cold darkness, a very blank and heavy 
darkness, it was the darkness of the night sky of Krikkit. 
The coldness and heaviness and blankness of it took a slow grip on 
Arthur's heart, and he felt acutely aware of the feelings of the Krikkit 
pilots which hung in the air like a thick static charge. They were now 
on the very boundary of the historical knowledge of their race. This 
was the very limit beyond which none of them had ever speculated, 
or even known that there was any speculation to be done. 
The darkness of the cloud buffeted at the ship. Inside was the 
silence of history. Their historic mission was to find out if there was 
anything or anywhere on the other side of the sky, from which the 
wrecked spaceship could have come, another world maybe, strange 
and incomprehensible though this thought was to the enclosed minds 
of those who had lived beneath the sky of Krikkit. 
History was gathering itself to deliver another blow. 
Still the darkness thrummed at them, the blank enclosing darkness. 
It seemed closer and closer, thicker and thicker, heavier and heavier. 
And suddenly it was gone. 
They flew out of the cloud. 
They saw the staggering jewels of the night in their infinite dust 
and their minds sang with fear. 
For a while they flew on, motionless against the starry sweep of the 
Galaxy, itself motionless against the infinite sweep of the Universe. 
And then they turned round. 
"It'll have to go," the men of Krikkit said as they headed back for 
home. 
On the way back they sang a number of tuneful and reflective 
songs on the subjects of peace, justice, morality, culture, sport, family 
life and the obliteration of all other life forms. 
Chapter 11
"So you see," said Slartibartfast, slowly stirring his artificially 
constructed coffee, and thereby also stirring the whirlpool interfaces 
between real and unreal numbers, between the interactive 
perceptions of mind and Universe, and thus generating the 
restructured matrices of implicitly enfolded subjectivity which 
allowed his ship to reshape the very concept of time and space, "how 
it is." 
"Yes," said Arthur. 
"Yes," said Ford. 
"What do I do," said Arthur, "with this piece of chicken?" 
Slartibartfast glanced at him gravely. 
"Toy with it," he said, "toy with it." 
He demonstrated with his own piece. 
Arthur did so, and felt the slight tingle of a mathematical function 
thrilling through the chicken leg as it moved four`dimensionally 
through what Slartibartfast had assured him was five`dimensional 
space. 
"Overnight," said Slartibartfast, "the whole population of Krikkit 
was transformed from being charming, delightful, intelligent..." 
"... if whimsical..." interpolated Arthur. 
"... ordinary people," said Slartibartfast, "into charming, delightful, 
intelligent..." 
"... whimsical..." 
"... manic xenophobes. The idea of a Universe didn't fit into their 
world picture, so to speak. They simply couldn't cope with it. And so, 
charmingly, delightfully, intelligently, whimsically if you like, they 
decided to destroy it. What's the matter now?" 
"I don't like the wine very much," said Arthur sniffing it. 
"Well, send it back. It's all part of the mathematics of it." 
Arthur did so. He didn't like the topography of the waiter's smile, 
but he'd never liked graphs anyway. 
"Where are we going?" said Ford. 
"Back to the Room of Informational Illusions," said Slartibartfast, 
rising and patting his mouth with the mathematical representation of 
a paper napkin, "for the second half." 
Chapter 12
"The people of Krikkit," said His High Judgmental Supremacy, 
Judiciary Pag, LIVR (the Learned, Impartial and Very Relaxed) 
Chairman of the Board of Judges at the Krikkit War Crimes Trial, "are, 
well, you know, they're just a bunch of real sweet guys, you know, 
who just happen to want to kill everybody. Hell, I feel the same way 
some mornings. Shit. 
"OK," he continued, swinging his feet up on to the bench in front of 
him and pausing a moment to pick a thread off his Ceremonial Beach 
Loafers, "so you wouldn't necessarily want to share a Galaxy with 
these guys." 
This was true. 
The Krikkit attack on the Galaxy had been stunning. Thousands and 
thousands of huge Krikkit warships had leapt suddenly out of 
hyperspace and simultaneously attacked thousands and thousands of 
major worlds, first seizing vital material supplies for building the next 
wave, and then calmly zapping those worlds out of existence. 
The Galaxy, which had been enjoying a period of unusual peace 
and prosperity at the time, reeled like a man getting mugged in a 
meadow. 
"I mean," continued Judiciary Pag, gazing round the ultra`modern 
(this was ten billion years ago, when "ultra`modern" meant lots of 
stainless steel and brushed concrete) and huge courtroom, "these 
guys are just obsessed." 
This too was true, and is the only explanation anyone has yet 
managed to come up with for the unimaginable speed with which the 
people of Krikkit had pursued their new and absolute purpose ʹ the 
destruction of everything that wasn't Krikkit. 
It is also the only explanation for their bewildering sudden grasp of 
all the hypertechnology involved in building their thousands of 
spaceships, and their millions of lethal white robots. 
These had really struck terror into the hearts of everyone who had 
encountered them ʹ in most cases, however, the terror was 
extremely short`lived, as was the person experiencing the terror. They 
were savage, single`minded flying battle machines. They wielded 
formidable multifunctional battleclubs which, brandished one way, 
would knock down buildings and, brandished another way, fired 
blistering Omni`Destructo Zap Rays and, brandished a third way, 
launched a hideous arsenal of grenades, ranging from minor 
incendiary devices to Maxi`Slorta Hypernuclear Devices which could 
take out a major sun. Simply striking the grenades with the 
battleclubs simultaneously primed them, and launched them with 
phenomenal accuracy over distances ranging from mere yards to 
hundreds of thousands of miles. 
"OK," said Judiciary Pag again, "so we won." He paused and 
chewed a little gum. "We won," he repeated, "but that's no big deal. I 
mean a medium`sized galaxy against one little world, and how long 
did it take us? Clerk of the Court?" 
"M'lud?" said the severe little man in black, rising. 
"How long, kiddo?" 
"It is a trifle difficult, m'lud, to be precise in this matter. Time and 
distance..." 
"Relax, guy, be vague." 
"I hardly like to be vague, m'lud, over such a..." 
"Bite the bullet and be it." 
The Clerk of the Court blinked at him. It was clear that like most of 
the Galactic legal profession he found Judiciary Pag (or Zipo Bibrok 
5x108, as his private name was known, inexplicably, to be) a rather 
distressing figure. He was clearly a bounder and a cad. He seemed to 
think that the fact that he was the possessor of the finest legal mind 
ever discovered gave him the right to behave exactly as he liked, and 
unfortunately he appeared to be right. 
"Er, well, m'lud, very approximately, two thousand years," the 
Clerk murmured unhappily. 
"And how many guys zilched out?" 
"Two grillion, m'lud." The Clerk sat down. A hydrospectic photo of 
him at this point would have revealed that he was steaming slightly. 
Judiciary Pag gazed once more around the courtroom, wherein 
were assembled hundreds of the very highest officials of the entire 
Galactic administration, all in their ceremonial uniforms or bodies, 
depending on metabolism and custom. Behind a wall of Zap`Proof 
Crystal stood a representative group of the people of Krikkit, looking 
with calm, polite loathing at all the aliens gathered to pass judgment 
on them. This was the most momentous occasion in legal history, and 
Judiciary Pag knew it. 
He took out his chewing gum and stuck it under his chair. 
"That's a whole lotta stiffs," he said quietly. 
The grim silence in the courtroom seemed in accord with this view. 
"So, like I said, these are a bunch of really sweet guys, but you 
wouldn't want to share a Galaxy with them, not if they're just gonna 
keep at it, not if they're not gonna learn to relax a little. I mean it's 
just gonna be continual nervous time, isn't it, right? Pow, pow, pow, 
when are they next coming at us? Peaceful coexistence is just right 
out, right? Get me some water somebody, thank you." 
He sat back and sipped reflectively. 
"OK," he said, "hear me, hear me. It's, like, these guys, you know, 
are entitled to their own view of the Universe. And according to their 
view, which the Universe forced on them, right, they did right. Sounds 
crazy, but I think you'll agree. They believe in..." 
He consulted a piece of paper which he found in the back pocket of 
his Judicial jeans. 
"They believe in 'peace, justice, morality, culture, sport, family life, 
and the obliteration of all other life forms'." 
He shrugged. 
"I've heard a lot worse," he said. 
He scratched his crotch reflectively. 
"Freeeow," he said. He took another sip of water, then held it up to 
the light and frowned at it. He twisted it round. 
"Hey, is there something in this water?" he said. 
"Er, no, m'lud," said the Court Usher who had brought it to him, 
rather nervously. 
"Then take it away," snapped Judiciary Pag, "and put something in 
it. I got an idea." 
He pushed away the glass and leaned forward. 
"Hear me, hear me," he said. 
The solution was brilliant, and went like this: 
The planet of Krikkit was to be enclosed for perpetuity in an 
envelope of Slo`Time, inside which life would continue almost 
infinitely slowly. All light would be deflected round the envelope so 
that it would remain invisible and impenetrable. Escape from the 
envelope would be utterly impossible unless it were locked from the 
outside. 
When the rest of the Universe came to its final end, when the 
whole of creation reached its dying fall (this was all, of course, in the 
days before it was known that the end of the Universe would be a 
spectacular catering venture) and life and matter ceased to exist, then 
the planet of Krikkit and its sun would emerge from its Slo`Time 
envelope and continue a solitary existence, such as it craved, in the 
twilight of the Universal void. 
The Lock would be on an asteroid which would slowly orbit the 
envelope. 
The key would be the symbol of the Galaxy ʹ the Wikkit Gate. 
By the time the applause in the court had died down, Judiciary Pag 
was already in the Sens`O`Shower with a rather nice member of the 
jury that he'd slipped a note to half an hour earlier. 
Chapter 13
Two months later, Zipo Bibrok 5x108 had cut the bottoms off his 
Galactic State jeans, and was spending part of the enormous fee his 
judgments commanded lying on a jewelled beach having Essence of 
Qualactin rubbed into his back by the same rather nice member of 
the jury. She was a Soolfinian girl from beyond the Cloudworlds of 
Yaga. She had skin like lemon silk and was very interested in legal 
bodies. 
"Did you hear the news?" she said. 
"Weeeeelaaaaah " said Zipo Bibrok 5x108, and you would have had 
to have been there to know exactly why he said this. None of this was 
on the tape of Informational Illusions, and is all based on hearsay. 
"No," he added, when the thing that had made him say 
"Weeeeelaaaaah" had stopped happening. He moved his body round 
slightly to catch the first rays of the third and greatest of primeval 
Vod's three suns which was now creeping over the ludicrously 
beautiful horizon, and the sky now glittered with some of the greatest 
tanning power ever known. 
A fragrant breeze wandered up from the quiet sea, trailed along 
the beach, and drifted back to sea again, wondering where to go next. 
On a mad impulse it went up to the beach again. It drifted back to sea. 
"I hope it isn't good news," muttered Zipo Bibrok 5x108, "'cos I 
don't think I could bear it." 
"Your Krikkit judgment was carried out today," said the girl 
sumptuously. There was no need to say such a straightforward thing 
sumptuously, but she went ahead and did it anyway because it was 
that sort of day. "I heard it on the radio," she said, "when I went back 
to the ship for the oil." 
"Uhuh," muttered Zipo and rested his head back on the jewelled 
sand. 
"Something happened," she said. 
"Mmmm?" 
"Just after the Slo`Time envelope was locked," she said, and 
paused a moment from rubbing in the Essence of Qualactin, "a Krikkit 
warship which had been missing presumed destroyed turned out to 
be just missing after all. It appeared and tried to seize the Key." 
Zipo sat up sharply. 
"Hey, what?" he said. 
"It's all right," she said in a voice which would have calmed the Big 
Bang down. "Apparently there was a short battle. The Key and the 
warship were disintegrated and blasted into the space`time 
continuum. Apparently they are lost for ever." 
She smiled, and ran a little more Essence of Qualactin on to her 
fingertips. He relaxed and lay back down. 
"Do what you did a moment or two ago," he murmured. 
"That?" she said. 
"No, no," he said, "that." 
She tried again. 
"That?" she asked. 
"Weeeeelaaaaah " 
Again, you had to be there. 
The fragrant breeze drifted up from the sea again. 
A magician wandered along the beach, but no one needed him. 
Chapter 14
"Nothing is lost for ever," said Slartibartfast, his face flickering redly 
in the light of the candle which the robot waiter was trying to take 
away, "except for the Cathedral of Chalesm." 
"The what?" said Arthur with a start. 
"The Cathedral of Chalesm," repeated Slartibartfast. "It was during 
the course of my researches at the Campaign for Real Time that I..." 
"The what?" said Arthur again. 
The old man paused and gathered his thoughts, for what he hoped 
would be one last onslaught on his story. The robot waiter moved 
through the space`time matrices in a way which spectacularly 
combined the surly with the obsequious, made a snatch for the 
candle and got it. They had had the bill, had argued convincingly 
about who had had the cannelloni and how many bottles of wine they 
had had, and, as Arthur had been dimly aware, had thereby 
successfully manoeuvred the ship out of subjective space and into a 
parking orbit round a strange planet. The waiter was now anxious to 
complete his part of the charade and clear the bistro. 
"All will become clear," said Slartibartfast. 
"When?" 
"In a minute. Listen. The time streams are now very polluted. 
There's a lot of muck floating about in them, flotsam and jetsam, and 
more and more of it is now being regurgitated into the physical world. 
Eddies in the space`time continuum, you see." 
"So I hear," said Arthur. 
"Look, where are we going?" said Ford, pushing his chair back from 
the table with impatience. "Because I'm eager to get there." 
"We are going," said Slartibartfast in a slow, measured voice, "to 
try to prevent the war robots of Krikkit from regaining the whole of 
the Key they need to unlock the planet of Krikkit from the Slo`Time 
envelope and release the rest of their army and their mad Masters." 
"It's just," said Ford, "that you mentioned a party." 
"I did," said Slartibartfast, and hung his head. 
He realized that it had been a mistake, because the idea seemed to 
exercise a strange and unhealthy fascination on the mind of Ford 
Prefect. The more that Slartibartfast unravelled the dark and tragic 
story of Krikkit and its people, the more Ford Prefect wanted to drink 
a lot and dance with girls. 
The old man felt that he should not have mentioned the party until 
he absolutely had to. But there it was, the fact was out, and Ford 
Prefect had attached himself to it the way an Arcturan Megaleach 
attaches itself to its victim before biting his head off and making off 
with his spaceship. 
"When," said Ford eagerly, "do we get there?" 
"When I've finished telling you why we have to go there." 
"I know why I'm going," said Ford, and leaned back, sticking his 
hands behind his head. He gave one of his smiles which made people 
twitch. 
Slartibartfast had hoped for an easy retirement. 
He had been planning to learn to play the octraventral 
heebiephone ʹ a pleasantly futile task, he knew, because he had the 
wrong number of mouths. 
He had also been planning to write an eccentric and relentlessly 
inaccurate monograph on the subject of equatorial fjords in order to 
set the record wrong about one or two matters he saw as important. 
Instead, he had somehow got talked into doing some part`time 
work for the Campaign for Real Time and had started to take it all 
seriously for the first time in his life. As a result he now found himself 
spending his fast`declining years combating evil and trying to save the 
Galaxy. 
He found it exhausting work and sighed heavily. 
"Listen," he said, "at Camtim..." 
"What?" said Arthur. 
"The Campaign for Real Time, which I will tell you about later. I 
noticed that five pieces of jetsam which had in relatively recent times 
plopped back into existence seemed to correspond to the five pieces 
of the missing Key. Only two I could trace exactly ʹ the Wooden Pillar, 
which appeared on your planet, and the Silver Bail. It seems to be at 
some sort of party. We must go there to retrieve it before the Krikkit 
robots find it, or who knows what may hap?" 
"No," said Ford firmly. "We must go to the party in order to drink a 
lot and dance with girls." 
"But haven't you understood everything I...?" 
"Yes," said Ford, with a sudden and unexpected fierceness, "I've 
understood it all perfectly well. That's why I want to have as many 
drinks and dance with as many girls as possible while there are still 
any left. If everything you've shown us is true..." 
"True? Of course it's true." 
"... then we don't stand a whelk's chance in a supernova." 
"A what?" said Arthur sharply again. He had been following the 
conversation doggedly up to this point, and was keen not to lose the 
thread now. 
"A whelk's chance in a supernova," repeated Ford without losing 
momentum. "The..." 
"What's a whelk got to do with a supernova?" said Arthur. 
"It doesn't," said Ford levelly, "stand a chance in one." 
He paused to see if the matter was now cleared up. The freshly 
puzzled looks clambering across Arthur's face told him that it wasn't. 
"A supernova," said Ford as quickly and as clearly as he could, "is a 
star which explodes at almost half the speed of light and burns with 
the brightness of a billion suns and then collapses as a super`heavy 
neutron star. It's a star which burns up other stars, got it? Nothing 
stands a chance in a supernova." 
"I see," said Arthur. 
"The..." 
"So why a whelk particularly?" 
"Why not a whelk? Doesn't matter." 
Arthur accepted this, and Ford continued, picking up his early fierce 
momentum as best he could. 
"The point is," he said, "that people like you and me, Slartibartfast, 
and Arthur ʹ particularly and especially Arthur ʹ are just dilletantes, 
eccentrics, layabouts, fartarounds if you like." 
Slartibartfast frowned, partly in puzzlement and partly in umbrage. 
He started to speak. 
" ʹ ..." is as far as he got. 
"We're not obsessed by anything, you see," insisted Ford. 
"..." 
"And that's the deciding factor. We can't win against obsession. 
They care, we don't. They win." 
"I care about lots of things," said Slartibartfast, his voice trembling 
partly with annoyance, but partly also with uncertainty. 
"Such as?" 
"Well," said the old man, "life, the Universe. Everything, really. 
Fjords." 
"Would you die for them?" 
"Fjords?" blinked Slartibartfast in surprise. "No." 
"Well then." 
"Wouldn't see the point, to be honest." 
"And I still can't see the connection," said Arthur, "with whelks." 
Ford could feel the conversation slipping out of his control, and 
refused to be sidetracked by anything at this point. 
"The point is," he hissed, "that we are not obsessive people, and 
we don't stand a chance against..." 
"Except for your sudden obsession with whelks," pursued Arthur, 
"which I still haven't understood." 
"Will you please leave whelks out of it?" 
"I will if you will," said Arthur. "You brought the subject up." 
"It was an error," said Ford, "forget them. The point is this." 
He leant forward and rested his forehead on the tips of his fingers. 
"What was I talking about?" he said wearily. 
"Let's just go down to the party," said Slartibartfast, "for whatever 
reason." He stood up, shaking his head. 
"I think that's what I was trying to say," said Ford. 
For some unexplained reason, the teleport cubicles were in the 
bathroom. 
Chapter 15
Time travel is increasingly regarded as a menace. History is being 
polluted. 
The Encyclopedia Galactica has much to say on the theory and 
practice of time travel, most of which is incomprehensible to anyone 
who hasn't spent at least four lifetimes studying advanced 
hypermathematics, and since it was impossible to do this before time 
travel was invented, there is a certain amount of confusion as to how 
the idea was arrived at in the first place. One rationalization of this 
problem states that time travel was, by its very nature, discovered 
simultaneously at all periods of history, but this is clearly bunk. 
The trouble is that a lot of history is now quite clearly bunk as well. 
Here is an example. It may not seem to be an important one to 
some people, but to others it is crucial. It is certainly significant in that 
it was the single event which caused the Campaign for Real Time to 
be set up in the first place (or is it last? It depends which way round 
you see history as happening, and this too is now an increasingly 
vexed question). 
There is, or was, a poet. His name was Lallafa, and he wrote what 
are widely regarded throughout the Galaxy as being the finest poems 
in existence, the Songs of the Long Land. 
They are/were unspeakably wonderful. That is to say, you couldn't 
speak very much of them at once without being so overcome with 
emotion, truth and a sense of wholeness and oneness of things that 
you wouldn't pretty soon need a brisk walk round the block, possibly 
pausing at a bar on the way back for a quick glass of perspective and 
soda. They were that good. 
Lallafa had lived in the forests of the Long Lands of Effa. He lived 
there, and he wrote his poems there. He wrote them on pages made 
of dried habra leaves, without the benefit of education or correcting 
fluid. He wrote about the light in the forest and what he thought 
about that. He wrote about the darkness in the forest, and what he 
thought about that. He wrote about the girl who had left him and 
precisely what he thought about that. 
Long after his death his poems were found and wondered over. 
News of them spread like morning sunlight. For centuries they 
illuminated and watered the lives of many people whose lives might 
otherwise have been darker and drier. 
Then, shortly after the invention of time travel, some major 
correcting fluid manufacturers wondered whether his poems might 
have been better still if he had had access to some high`quality 
correcting fluid, and whether he might be persuaded to say a few 
words on that effect. 
They travelled the time waves, they found him, they explained the 
situation ʹ with some difficulty ʹ to him, and did indeed persuade him. 
In fact they persuaded him to such an effect that he became 
extremely rich at their hands, and the girl about whom he was 
otherwise destined to write which such precision never got around to 
leaving him, and in fact they moved out of the forest to a rather nice 
pad in town and he frequently commuted to the future to do chat 
shows, on which he sparkled wittily. 
He never got around to writing the poems, of course, which was a 
problem, but an easily solved one. The manufacturers of correcting 
fluid simply packed him off for a week somewhere with a copy of a 
later edition of his book and a stack of dried habra leaves to copy 
them out on to, making the odd deliberate mistake and correction on 
the way. 
Many people now say that the poems are suddenly worthless. 
Others argue that they are exactly the same as they always were, so 
what's changed? The first people say that that isn't the point. They 
aren't quite sure what the point is, but they are quite sure that that 
isn't it. They set up the Campaign for Real Time to try to stop this sort 
of thing going on. Their case was considerably strengthened by the 
fact that a week after they had set themselves up, news broke that 
not only had the great Cathedral of Chalesm been pulled down in 
order to build a new ion refinery, but that the construction of the 
refinery had taken so long, and had had to extend so far back into the 
past in order to allow ion production to start on time, that the 
Cathedral of Chalesm had now never been built in the first place. 
Picture postcards of the cathedral suddenly became immensely 
valuable. 
So a lot of history is now gone for ever. The Campaign for Real 
Timers claim that just as easy travel eroded the differences between 
one country and another, and between one world and another, so 
time travel is now eroding the differences between one age and 
another. "The past," they say, "is now truly like a foreign country. 
They do things exactly the same there." 
Chapter 16
Arthur materialized, and did so with all the customary staggering 
about and clasping at his throat, heart and various limbs which he still 
indulged himself in whenever he made any of these hateful and 
painful materializations that he was determined not to let himself get 
used to. 
He looked around for the others. 
They weren't there. 
He looked around for the others again. 
They still weren't there. 
He closed his eyes. 
He opened them 
He looked around for the others. 
They obstinately persisted in their absence. 
He closed his eyes again, preparatory to making this completely 
futile exercise once more, and because it was only then, whilst his 
eyes were closed, that his brain began to register what his eyes had 
been looking at whilst they were open, a puzzled frown crept across 
his face. 
So he opened his eyes again to check his facts and the frown stayed 
put. 
If anything, it intensified, and got a good firm grip. If this was a 
party it was a very bad one, so bad, in fact, that everybody else had 
left. He abandoned this line of thought as futile. Obviously this wasn't 
a party. It was a cave, or a labyrinth, or a tunnel of something ʹ there 
was insufficient light to tell. All was darkness, a damp shiny darkness. 
The only sounds were the echoes of his own breathing, which 
sounded worried. He coughed very slightly, and then had to listen to 
the thin ghostly echo of his cough trailing away amongst winding 
corridors and sightless chambers, as of some great labyrinth, and 
eventually returning to him via the same unseen corridors, as if to 
say... "Yes?" 
This happened to every slightest noise he made, and it unnerved 
him. He tried to hum a cheery tune, but by the time it returned to him 
it was a hollow dirge and he stopped. 
His mind was suddenly full of images from the story that 
Slartibartfast had been telling him. He half`expected suddenly to see 
lethal white robots step silently from the shadows and kill him. He 
caught his breath. They didn't. He let it go again. He didn't know what 
he did expect. 
Someone or something, however, seemed to be expecting him, for 
at that moment there lit up suddenly in the dark distance an eerie 
green neon sign. 
It said, silently: 
YOU HAVE BEEN DIVERTED 
The sign flicked off again, in a way which Arthur was not at all 
certain he liked. It flicked off with a sort of contemptuous flourish. 
Arthur then tried to assure himself that this was just a ridiculous trick 
of his imagination. A neon sign is either on or off, depending on 
whether it has electricity running through it or not. There was no way, 
he told himself, that it could possibly effect the transition from one 
state to the other with a contemptuous flourish. He hugged himself 
tightly in his dressing gown and shivered, nevertheless. 
The neon sign in the depths now suddenly lit up, bafflingly, with 
just three dots and a comma. Like this: 
..., 
Only in green neon. 
It was trying, Arthur realized after staring at this perplexedly for a 
second or two, to indicate that there was more to come, that the 
sentence was not complete. Trying with almost superhuman pedantry, 
he reflected. Or at least, inhuman pedantry. 
The sentence then completed itself with these two words: 
ARTHUR DENT. 
He reeled. He steadied himself to have another clear look at it. It 
still said ARTHUR DENT, so he reeled again. 
Once again, the sign flicked off, and left him blinking in the 
darkness with just the dim red image of his name jumping on his 
retina. 
WELCOME, the sign now suddenly said. 
After a moment, it added: 
I DON'T THINK. 
The stone`cold fear which had been hovering about Arthur all this 
time, waiting for its moment, recognized that its moment had now 
come and pounced on him. He tried to fight it off. He dropped into a 
kind of alert crouch that he had once seen somebody do on television, 
but it must have been someone with stronger knees. He peered 
huntedly into the darkness. 
"Er, hello?" he said. 
He cleared his throat and said it again, more loudly and without the 
"er". At some distance down the corridor it seemed suddenly as if 
somebody started to beat on a bass drum. 
He listened to it for a few seconds and realized that it was just his 
heart beating. 
He listened for a few seconds more and realized that it wasn't his 
heart beating, it was somebody down the corridor beating on a bass 
drum. 
Beads of sweat formed on his brow, tensed themselves, and leapt 
off. He put a hand out on the floor to steady his alert crouch, which 
wasn't holding up very well. The sign changed itself again. It said: 
DO NOT BE ALARMED. 
After a pause, it added: 
BE VERY VERY FRIGHTENED, ARTHUR DENT. 
Once again it flicked off. Once again it left him in darkness. His eyes 
seemed to be popping out of his head. He wasn't certain if this was 
because they were trying to see more clearly, or if they simply wanted 
to leave at this point. 
"Hello?" he said again, this time trying to put a note of rugged and 
aggressive self`assertion into it. "Is anyone there?" 
There was no reply, nothing. 
This unnerved Arthur Dent even more than a reply would have 
done, and he began to back away from the scary nothingness. And 
the more he backed away, the more scared he became. After a while 
he realized that the reason for this was because of all the films he had 
seen in which the hero backs further and further away from some 
imagined terror in front of him, only to bump into it coming up from 
behind. 
Just then it suddenly occurred to him to turn round rather quickly. 
There was nothing there. 
Just blackness. 
This really unnerved him, and he started to back away from that, 
back the way he had come. 
After doing this for a short while it suddenly occurred to him that 
he was now backing towards whatever it was he had been backing 
away from in the first place. 
This, he couldn't help thinking, must be a foolish thing to do. He 
decided he would be better off backing the way he had first been 
backing, and turned around again. 
It turned out at this point that his second impulse had been the 
correct one, because there was an indescribably hideous monster 
standing quietly behind him. Arthur yawed wildly as his skin tried to 
jump one way and his skeleton the other, whilst his brain tried to 
work out which of his ears it most wanted to crawl out of. 
"Bet you weren't expecting to see me again," said the monster, 
which Arthur couldn't help thinking was a strange remark for it to 
make, seeing as he had never met the creature before. He could tell 
that he hadn't met the creature before from the simple fact that he 
was able to sleep at nights. It was... it was... it was... 
Arthur blinked at it. It stood very still. It did look a little familiar. 
A terrible cold calm came over him as he realized that what he was 
looking at was a six`foot`high hologram of a housefly. 
He wondered why anybody would be showing him a six`foot`high 
hologram of a housefly at this time. He wondered whose voice he had 
heard. 
It was a terribly realistic hologram. 
It vanished. 
"Or perhaps you remember me better," said the voice suddenly, 
and it was a deep, hollow malevolent voice which sounded like 
molten tar glurping out of a drum with evil on its mind, "as the 
rabbit." 
With a sudden ping, there was a rabbit there in the black labyrinth 
with him, a huge, monstrously, hideously soft and lovable rabbit ʹ an 
image again, but one on which every single soft and lovable hair 
seemed like a real and single thing growing in its soft and lovable coat. 
Arthur was startled to see his own reflection in its soft and lovable 
unblinking and extremely huge brown eyes. 
"Born in darkness," rumbled the voice, "raised in darkness. One 
morning I poked my head for the first time into the bright new world 
and got it split open by what felt suspiciously like some primitive 
instrument made of flint. 
"Made by you, Arthur Dent, and wielded by you. Rather hard as I 
recall. 
"You turned my skin into a bag for keeping interesting stones in. I 
happen to know that because in my next life I came back as a fly again 
and you swatted me. Again. Only this time you swatted me with the 
bag you'd made of my previous skin. 
"Arthur Dent, you are not merely a cruel and heartless man, you 
are also staggeringly tactless." 
The voice paused whilst Arthur gawped. 
"I see you have lost the bag," said the voice. "Probably got bored 
with it, did you?" 
Arthur shook his head helplessly. He wanted to explain that he had 
been in fact very fond of the bag and had looked after it very well and 
had taken it with him wherever he went, but that somehow every 
time he travelled anywhere he seemed inexplicably to end up with 
the wrong bag and that, curiously enough, even as they stood there 
he was just noticing for the first time that the bag he had with him at 
the moment appeared to be made out of rather nasty fake leopard 
skin, and wasn't the one he'd had a few moments ago before he 
arrived in this whatever place it was, and wasn't one he would have 
chosen himself and heaven knew what would be in it as it wasn't his, 
and he would much rather have his original bag back, except that he 
was of course terribly sorry for having so peremptorily removed it, or 
rather its component parts, i.e. the rabbit skin, from its previous 
owner, viz. the rabbit whom he currently had the honour of 
attempting vainly to address. 
All he actually managed to say was "Erp". 
"Meet the newt you trod on," said the voice. 
And there was, standing in the corridor with Arthur, a giant green 
scaly newt. Arthur turned, yelped, leapt backwards, and found himself 
standing in the middle of the rabbit. He yelped again, but could find 
nowhere to leap to. 
"That was me, too," continued the voice in a low menacing rumble, 
"as if you didn't know..." 
"Know?" said Arthur with a start. "Know?" 
"The interesting thing about reincarnation," rasped the voice, "is 
that most people, most spirits, are not aware that it is happening to 
them." 
He paused for effect. As far as Arthur was concerned there was 
already quite enough effect going on. 
"I was aware," hissed the voice, "that is, I became aware. Slowly. 
Gradually." 
He, whoever he was, paused again and gathered breath. 
"I could hardly help it, could I?" he bellowed, "when the same thing 
kept happening, over and over and over again  Every life I ever lived, I 
got killed by Arthur Dent. Any world, any body, any time, I'm just 
getting settled down, along comes Arthur Dent ʹ pow, he kills me. 
"Hard not to notice. Bit of a memory jogger. Bit of a pointer. Bit of 
a bloody giveaway  
"'That's funny,' my spirit would say to itself as it winged its way 
back to the netherworld after another fruitless Dent`ended venture 
into the land of the living, 'that man who just ran over me as I was 
hopping across the road to my favourite pond looked a little 
familiar...' And gradually I got to piece it together, Dent, you multiple`
me`murderer " 
The echoes of his voice roared up and down the corridors. Arthur 
stood silent and cold, his head shaking with disbelief. 
"Here's the moment, Dent," shrieked the voice, now reaching a 
feverish pitch of hatred, "here's the moment when at last I knew " 
It was indescribably hideous, the thing that suddenly opened up in 
front of Arthur, making him gasp and gargle with horror, but here's an 
attempt at a description of how hideous it was. It was a huge 
palpitating wet cave with a vast, slimy, rough, whale`like creature 
rolling around it and sliding over monstrous white tombstones. High 
above the cave rose a vast promontory in which could be seen the 
dark recesses of two further fearful caves, which... 
Arthur Dent suddenly realized that he was looking at his own 
mouth, when his attention was meant to be directed at the live oyster 
that was being tipped helplessly into it. 
He staggered back with a cry and averted his eyes. 
When he looked again the appalling apparition had gone. The 
corridor was dark and, briefly, silent. He was alone with his thoughts. 
They were extremely unpleasant thoughts and would rather have had 
a chaperone. 
The next noise, when it came, was the low heavy roll of a large 
section of wall trundling aside, revealing, for the moment, just dark 
blackness behind it. Arthur looked into it in much the same way that a 
mouse looks into a dark dog`kennel. 
And the voice spoke to him again. 
"Tell me it was a coincidence, Dent," it said. "I dare you to tell me it 
was a coincidence " 
"It was a coincidence," said Arthur quickly. 
"It was not " came the answering bellow. 
"It was," said Arthur, "it was..." 
"If it was a coincidence, then my name," roared the voice, "is not 
Agrajag   " 
"And presumably," said Arthur, "you would claim that that was 
your name." 
"Yes " hissed Agrajag, as if he had just completed a rather deft 
syllogism. 
"Well, I'm afraid it was still a coincidence," said Arthur. 
"Come in here and say that " howled the voice, in sudden apoplexy 
again. 
Arthur walked in and said that it was a coincidence, or at least, he 
nearly said that it was a coincidence. His tongue rather lost its footing 
towards the end of the last word because the lights came up and 
revealed what it was he had walked into. 
It was a Cathedral of Hate. 
It was the product of a mind that was not merely twisted, but 
actually sprained. 
It was huge. It was horrific. 
It had a Statue in it. 
We will come to the Statue in a moment. 
The vast, incomprehensibly vast chamber looked as if it had been 
carved out of the inside of a mountain, and the reason for this was 
that that was precisely what it had been carved out of. It seemed to 
Arthur to spin sickeningly round his head as he stood and gaped at it. 
It was black. 
Where it wasn't black you were inclined to wish that it was, 
because the colours with which some of the unspeakable details were 
picked out ranged horribly across the whole spectrum of eye`defying 
colours from Ultra Violent to Infra Dead, taking in Liver Purple, 
Loathsome Lilac, Matter Yellow, Burnt hombre and Gan Green on the 
way. 
The unspeakable details which these colours picked out were 
gargoyles which would have put Francis Bacon off his lunch. 
The gargoyles all looked inwards from the walls, from the pillars, 
from the flying buttresses, from the choir stalls, towards the Statue, 
to which we will come in a moment. 
And if the gargoyles would have put Francis Bacon off his lunch, 
then it was clear from the gargoyles' faces that the Statue would have 
put them off theirs, had they been alive to eat it, which they weren't, 
and had anybody tried to serve them some, which they wouldn't. 
Around the monumental walls were vast engraved stone tablets in 
memory of those who had fallen to Arthur Dent. 
The names of some of those commemorated were underlined and 
had asterisks against them. So, for instance, the name of a cow which 
had been slaughtered and of which Arthur Dent had happened to eat 
a fillet steak would have the plainest engraving, whereas the name of 
a fish which Arthur had himself caught and then decided he didn't like 
and left on the side of the plate had a double underlining, three sets 
of asterisks and a bleeding dagger added as decoration, just to make 
the point. 
And what was most disturbing about all this, apart from the Statue, 
to which we are, by degrees, coming, was the very clear implication 
that all these people and creatures were indeed the same person, 
over and over again. 
And it was equally clear that this person was, however unfairly, 
extremely upset and annoyed. 
In fact it would be fair to say that he had reached a level of 
annoyance the like of which had never been seen in the Universe. It 
was an annoyance of epic proportions, a burning searing flame of 
annoyance, an annoyance which now spanned the whole of time and 
space in its infinite umbrage. 
And this annoyance had been given its fullest expression in the 
Statue in the centre of all this monstrosity, which was a statue of 
Arthur Dent, and an unflattering one. Fifty feet tall if it was an inch, 
there was not an inch of it which wasn't crammed with insult to its 
subject matter, and fifty feet of that sort of thing would be enough to 
make any subject feel bad. From the small pimple on the side of his 
nose to the poorish cut of his dressing gown, there was no aspect of 
Arthur Dent which wasn't lambasted and vilified by the sculptor. 
Arthur appeared as a gorgon, an evil, rapacious, ravenning, 
bloodied ogre, slaughtering his way through an innocent one`man 
Universe. 
With each of the thirty arms which the sculptor in a fit of artistic 
fervour had decided to give him, he was either braining a rabbit, 
swatting a fly, pulling a wishbone, picking a flea out of his hair, or 
doing something which Arthur at first looking couldn't quite identify. 
His many feet were mostly stamping on ants. 
Arthur put his hands over his eyes, hung his head and shook it 
slowly from side to side in sadness and horror at the craziness of 
things. 
And when he opened his eyes again, there in front of him stood the 
figure of the man or creature, or whatever it was, that he had 
supposedly been persecuting all this time. 
"HhhhhhrrrrrraaaaaaHHHHHH " said Agrajag. 
He, or it, or whatever, looked like a mad fat bat. He waddled slowly 
around Arthur, and poked at him with bent claws. 
"Look... " protested Arthur. 
"HhhhhhrrrrrraaaaaaHHHHHH   " explained Agrajag, and Arthur 
reluctantly accepted this on the grounds that he was rather 
frightened by this hideous and strangely wrecked apparition. 
Agrajag was black, bloated, wrinkled and leathery. 
His batwings were somehow more frightening for being the 
pathetic broken floundering things they were that if they had been 
strong, muscular beaters of the air. The frightening thing was 
probably the tenacity of his continued existence against all the 
physical odds. 
He had the most astounding collection of teeth. 
They looked as if they each came from a completely different 
animal, and they were ranged around his mouth at such bizarre 
angles it seemed that if he ever actually tried to chew anything he'd 
lacerate half his own face along with it, and possibly put an eye out as 
well. 
Each of his three eyes was small and intense and looked about as 
sane as a fish in a privet bush. 
"I was at a cricket match," he rasped. 
This seemed on the face of it such a preposterous notion that 
Arthur practically choked. 
"Not in this body," screeched the creature, "not in this body  This is 
my last body. My last life. This is my revenge body. My kill`Arthur`
Dent body. My last chance. I had to fight to get it, too." 
"But..." 
"I was at," roared Agrajag, "a cricket match  I had a weak heart 
condition, but what, I said to my wife, can happen to me at a cricket 
match? As I'm watching, what happens? 
"Two people quite maliciously appear out of thin air just in front of 
me. The last thing I can't help but notice before my poor heart gives 
out in shock is that one of them is Arthur Dent wearing a rabbit bone 
in his beard. Coincidence?" 
"Yes," said Arthur. 
"Coincidence?" screamed the creature, painfully thrashing its 
broken wings, and opening a short gash on its right cheek with a 
particularly nasty tooth. On closer examination, such as he'd been 
hoping to avoid, Arthur noticed that much of Agrajag's face was 
covered with ragged strips of black sticky plasters. 
He backed away nervously. He tugged at his beard. He was 
appalled to discover that in fact he still had the rabbit bone in it. He 
pulled it out and threw it away. 
"Look," he said, "it's just fate playing silly buggers with you. With 
me. With us. It's a complete coincidence." 
"What have you got against me, Dent?" snarled the creature, 
advancing on him in a painful waddle. 
"Nothing," insisted Arthur, "honestly, nothing." 
Agrajag fixed him with a beady stare. 
"Seems a strange way to relate to somebody you've got nothing 
against, killing them all the time. Very curious piece of social 
interaction, I would call that. I'd also call it a lie " 
"But look," said Arthur, "I'm very sorry. There's been a terrible 
misunderstanding. I've got to go. Have you got a clock? I'm meant to 
be helping save the Universe." He backed away still further. 
Agrajag advanced still further. 
"At one point," he hissed, "at one point, I decided to give up. Yes, I 
would not come back. I would stay in the netherworld. And what 
happened?" 
Arthur indicated with random shakes of his head that he had no 
idea and didn't want to have one either. He found he had backed up 
against the cold dark stone that had been carved by who knew what 
Herculean effort into a monstrous travesty of his bedroom slippers. 
He glanced up at his own horrendously parodied image towering 
above him. He was still puzzled as to what one of his hands was 
meant to be doing. 
"I got yanked involuntarily back into the physical world," pursued 
Agrajag, "as a bunch of petunias. In, I might add, a bowl. This 
particularly happy little lifetime started off with me, in my bowl, 
unsupported, three hundred miles above the surface of a particularly 
grim planet. Not a naturally tenable position for a bowl of petunias, 
you might think. And you'd be right. That life ended a very short while 
later, three hundred miles lower. In, I might add, the fresh wreckage 
of a whale. My spirit brother." 
He leered at Arthur with renewed hatred. 
"On the way down," he snarled, "I couldn't help noticing a flashy`
looking white spaceship. And looking out of a port on this flashy`
looking spaceship was a smug`looking Arthur Dent. Coincidence?  " 
"Yes " yelped Arthur. He glanced up again, and realized that the 
arm that had puzzled him was represented as wantonly calling into 
existence a bowl of doomed petunias. This was not a concept which 
leapt easily to the eye. 
"I must go," insisted Arthur. 
"You may go," said Agrajag, "after I have killed you." 
"No, that won't be any use," explained Arthur, beginning to climb 
up the hard stone incline of his carved slipper, "because I have to save 
the Universe, you see. I have to find a Silver Bail, that's the point. 
Tricky thing to do dead." 
"Save the Universe " spat Agrajag with contempt. "You should have 
thought of that before you started your vendetta against me  What 
about the time you were on Stavromula Beta and someone..." 
"I've never been there," said Arthur. 
"... tried to assassinate you and you ducked. Who do you think the 
bullet hit? What did you say?" 
"Never been there," repeated Arthur. "What are you talking about? 
I have to go." 
Agrajag stopped in his tracks. 
"You must have been there. You were responsible for my death 
there, as everywhere else. An innocent bystander " He quivered. 
"I've never heard of the place," insisted Arthur. "I've certainly never 
had anyone try to assassinate me. Other than you. Perhaps I go there 
later, do you think?" 
Agrajag blinked slowly in a kind of frozen logical horror. 
"You haven't been to Stavromula Beta... yet?" he whispered. 
"No," said Arthur, "I don't know anything about the place. Certainly 
never been to it, and don't have any plans to go." 
"Oh, you go there all right," muttered Agrajag in a broken voice, 
"you go there all right. Oh zark " he tottered, and stared wildly about 
him at his huge Cathedral of Hate. "I've brought you here too soon " 
He started to scream and bellow. "I've brought you here too 
zarking soon " 
Suddenly he rallied, and turned a baleful, hating eye on Arthur. 
"I'm going to kill you anyway " he roared. "Even if it's a logical 
impossibility I'm going to zarking well try  I'm going to blow this whole 
mountain up " He screamed, "Let's see you get out of this one, Dent " 
He rushed in a painful waddling hobble to what appeared to be a 
small black sacrificial altar. He was shouting so wildly now that he was 
really carving his face up badly. Arthur leaped down from his vantage 
place on the carving of his own foot and ran to try to restrain the 
three`quarters`crazed creature. 
He leaped upon him, and brought the strange monstrosity crashing 
down on top of the altar. 
Agrajag screamed again, thrashed wildly for a brief moment, and 
turned a wild eye on Arthur. 
"You know what you've done?" he gurgled painfully. "You've only 
gone and killed me again. I mean, what do you want from me, 
blood?" 
He thrashed again in a brief apoplectic fit, quivered, and collapsed, 
smacking a large red button on the altar as he did so. 
Arthur started with horror and fear, first at what he appeared to 
have done, and then at the loud sirens and bells that suddenly 
shattered the air to announce some clamouring emergency. He stared 
wildly around him. 
The only exit appeared to be the way he came in. He pelted 
towards it, throwing away the nasty fake leopard`skin bag as he did so. 
He dashed randomly, haphazardly through the labyrinthine maze, 
he seemed to be pursued more and more fiercely by claxons, sirens, 
flashing lights. 
Suddenly, he turned a corner and there was a light in front of him. 
It wasn't flashing. It was daylight. 
Chapter 17
Although it has been said that on Earth alone in our Galaxy is 
Krikkit (or cricket) treated as fit subject for a game, and that for this 
reason the Earth has been shunned, this does only apply to our 
Galaxy, and more specifically to our dimension. In some of the higher 
dimensions they feel they can more or less please themselves, and 
have been playing a peculiar game called Brockian Ultra`Cricket for 
whatever their transdimensional equivalent of billions of years is. 
"Let's be blunt, it's a nasty game" (says The Hitchhiker's Guide to 
the Galaxy) "but then anyone who has been to any of the higher 
dimensions will know that they're a pretty nasty heathen lot up there 
who should just be smashed and done in, and would be, too, if 
anyone could work out a way of firing missiles at right`angles to 
reality." 
This is another example of the fact that The Hitchhiker's Guide to 
the Galaxy will employ anybody who wants to walk straight in off the 
street and get ripped off, especially if they happen to walk in off the 
street during the afternoon, when very few of the regular staff are 
there. 
There is a fundamental point here. 
The history of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is one of 
idealism, struggle, despair, passion, success, failure, and enormously 
long lunch`breaks. 
The earliest origins of the Guide are now, along with most of its 
financial records, lost in the mists of time. 
For other, and more curious theories about where they are lost, 
see below. 
Most of the surviving stories, however, speak of a founding editor 
called Hurling Frootmig. 
Hurling Frootmig, it is said, founded the Guide, established its 
fundamental principles of honesty and idealism, and went bust. 
There followed many years of penury and heart ʹ searching during 
which he consulted friends, sat in darkened rooms in illegal states of 
mind, thought about this and that, fooled about with weights, and 
then, after a chance encounter with the Holy Lunching Friars of 
Voondon (who claimed that just as lunch was at the centre of a man's 
temporal day, and man's temporal day could be seen as an analogy 
for his spiritual life, so Lunch should 
(a) be seen as the centre of a man's spiritual life, and 
(b) be held in jolly nice restaurants), he refounded the Guide, laid 
down its fundamental principles of honesty and idealism and where 
you could stuff them both, and led the Guide on to its first major 
commercial success. 
He also started to develop and explore the role of the editorial 
lunch`break which was subsequently to play such a crucial part in the 
Guide's history, since it meant that most of the actual work got done 
by any passing stranger who happened to wander into the empty 
offices on an afternoon and saw something worth doing. 
Shortly after this, the Guide was taken over by Megadodo 
Publications of Ursa Minor Beta, thus putting the whole thing on a 
very sound financial footing, and allowing the fourth editor, Lig Lury Jr, 
to embark on lunch`breaks of such breathtaking scope that even the 
efforts of recent editors, who have started undertaking sponsored 
lunch`breaks for charity, seem like mere sandwiches in comparison. 
In fact, Lig never formally resigned his editorship ʹ he merely left 
his office late one morning and has never since returned. Though well 
over a century has now passed, many members of the Guide staff still 
retain the romantic notion that he has simply popped out for a ham 
croissant, and will yet return to put in a solid afternoon's work. 
Strictly speaking, all editors since Lig Lury Jr have therefore been 
designated Acting Editors, and Lig's desk is still preserved the way he 
left it, with the addition of a small sign which says "LIG LURY JR, 
EDITOR, MISSING, PRESUMED FED". 
Some very scurrilous and subversive sources hint at the idea that 
Lig actually perished in the Guide's first extraordinary experiments in 
alternative book`keeping. Very little is known of this, and less still said. 
Anyone who even notices, let alone calls attention to, the curious but 
utter coincidental and meaningless fact that every world on which the 
Guide has ever set up an accounting department has shortly 
afterwards perished in warfare or some natural disaster, is liable to 
get sued to smithereens. 
It is an interesting though utterly unrelated fact that the two or 
three days prior to the demolition of the planet Earth to make way for 
a new hyperspace bypass saw a dramatic upsurge in the number of 
UFO sightings there, not only above Lords Cricket Ground in St. John's 
Wood, London, but also above Glastonbury in Somerset. 
Glastonbury had long been associated with myths of ancient kings, 
witchcraft, ley`lines an wart curing, and had now been selected as the 
site for the new Hitchhiker's Guide financial records office, and indeed, 
ten years' worth of financial records were transferred to a magic hill 
just outside the city mere hours before the Vogons arrived. 
None of these facts, however strange or inexplicable, is as strange 
or inexplicable as the rules of the game of Brockian Ultra`Cricket, as 
played in the higher dimensions. A full set of rules is so massively 
complicated that the only time they were all bound together in a 
single volume, they underwent gravitational collapse and became a 
Black Hole. 
A brief summary, however, is as follows: 
Rule One: Grow at least three extra legs. You won't need them, but 
it keeps the crowds amused. 
Rule Two: Find one good Brockian Ultra`Cricket player. Clone him 
off a few times. This saves an enormous amount of tedious selection 
and training. 
Rule Three: Put your team and the opposing team in a large field 
and build a high wall round them. 
The reason for this is that, though the game is a major spectator 
sport, the frustration experienced by the audience at not actually 
being able to see what's going on leads them to imagine that it's a lot 
more exciting than it really is. A crowd that has just watched a rather 
humdrum game experiences far less life`affirmation than a crowd that 
believes it has just missed the most dramatic event in sporting history. 
Rule Four: Throw lots of assorted items of sporting equipment over 
the wall for the players. Anything will do ʹ cricket bats, basecube bats, 
tennis guns, skis, anything you can get a good swing with. 
Rule Five: The players should now lay about themselves for all they 
are worth with whatever they find to hand. Whenever a player scores 
a "hit" on another player, he should immediately run away and 
apologize from a safe distance. 
Apologies should be concise, sincere and, for maximum clarity and 
points, delivered through a megaphone. 
Rule Six: The winning team shall be the first team that wins. 
Curiously enough, the more the obsession with the game grows in 
the higher dimensions, the less it is actually played, since most of the 
competing teams are now in a state of permanent warfare with each 
other over the interpretation of these rules. This is all for the best, 
because in the long run a good solid war is less psychologically 
damaging than a protracted game of Brockian Ultra`Cricket. 
Chapter 18
As Arthur ran darting, dashing and panting down the side of the 
mountain he suddenly felt the whole bulk of the mountain move very, 
very slightly beneath him. There was a rumble, a roar, and a slight 
blurred movement, and a lick of heat in the distance behind and 
above him. He ran in a frenzy of fear. The land began to slide, and he 
suddenly felt the force of the word "landslide" in a way which had 
never been apparent to him before. It had always just been a word to 
him, but now he was suddenly and horribly aware that sliding is a 
strange and sickening thing for land to do. It was doing it with him on 
it. He felt ill with fear and shaking. The ground slid, the mountain 
slurred, he slipped, he fell, he stood, he slipped again and ran. The 
avalance began. 
Stones, then rocks, then boulders which pranced past him like 
clumsy puppies, only much, much bigger, much, much harder and 
heavier, and almost infinitely more likely to kill you if they fell on you. 
His eyes danced with them, his feet danced with the dancing ground. 
He ran as if running was a terrible sweating sickness, his heart 
pounded to the rhythm of the pounding geological frenzy around him. 
The logic of the situation, i.e. that he was clearly bound to survive if 
the next foreshadowed incident in the saga of his inadvertent 
persecution of Agrajag was to happen, was utterly failing to impinge 
itself on his mind or exercise any restraining influence on him at this 
time. He ran with the fear of death in him, under him, over him and 
grabbing hold of his hair. 
And suddenly he tripped again and was hurled forward by his 
considerable momentum. But just at the moment that he was about 
to hit the ground astoundingly hard he saw lying directly in front of 
him a small navy`blue holdall that he knew for a fact he had lost in the 
baggage`retrieval system at Athens airport some ten years in his 
personal time`scale previously, and in his astonishment he missed the 
ground completely and bobbed off into the air with his brain singing. 
What he was doing was this: he was flying. He glanced around him 
in surprise, but there could be no doubt that that was what he was 
doing. No part of him was touching the ground, and no part of him 
was even approaching it. He was simply floating there with boulders 
hurtling through the air around him. 
He could now do something about that. Blinking with the non`
effort of it he wafted higher into the air, and now the boulders were 
hurtling through the air beneath him. 
He looked downwards with intense curiosity. Between him and the 
shivering ground were now some thirty feet of empty air, empty that 
is if you discounted the boulders which didn't stay in it for long, but 
bounded downwards in the iron grip of the law of gravity; the same 
law which seemed, all of a sudden, to have given Arthur a sabbatical. 
It occurred to him almost instantly, with the instinctive correctness 
that self`preservation instils in the mind, that he mustn't try to think 
about it, that if he did, the law of gravity would suddenly glance 
sharply in his direction and demand to know what the hell he thought 
he was doing up there, and all would suddenly be lost. 
So he thought about tulips. It was difficult, but he did. He thought 
about the pleasing firm roundness of the bottom of tulips, he thought 
about the interesting variety of colours they came in, and wondered 
what proportion of the total number of tulips that grew, or had grown, 
on the Earth would be found within a radius of one mile from a 
windmill. After a while he got dangerously bored with this train of 
thought, felt the air slipping away beneath him, felt that he was 
drifting down into the paths of the bouncing boulders that he was 
trying so hard not to think about, so he thought about Athens airport 
for a bit and that kept him usefully annoyed for about five minutes ʹ
at the end of which he was startled to discover that he was now 
floating about two hundred yards above the ground. 
He wondered for a moment how he was going to get back down to 
it, but instantly shied away from that area of speculation again, and 
tried to look at the situation steadily. 
He was flying, What was he going to do about it? He looked back 
down at the ground. He didn't look at it hard, but did his best just to 
give it an idle glance, as it were, in passing. There were a couple of 
things he couldn't help noticing. One was that the eruption of the 
mountain seemed now to have spent itself ʹ there was a crater just a 
little way beneath the peak, presumably where the rock had caved in 
on top of the huge cavernous cathedral, the statue of himself, and the 
sadly abused figure of Agrajag. 
The other was his hold`all, the one he had lost at Athens airport. It 
was sitting pertly on a piece of clear ground, surrounded by 
exhausted boulders but apparently hit by none of them. Why this 
should be he could not speculate, but since this mystery was 
completely overshadowed by the monstrous impossibility of the bag's 
being there in the first place, it was not a speculation he really felt 
strong enough for anyway. The thing is, it was there. And the nasty, 
fake leopard`skin bag seemed to have disappeared, which was all to 
the good, if not entirely to the explicable. 
He was faced with the fact that he was going to have to pick the 
thing up. Here he was, flying along two hundred yards above the 
surface of an alien planet the name of which he couldn't even 
remember. He could not ignore the plaintive posture of this tiny piece 
of what used to be his life, here, so many light`years from the 
pulverized remains of his home. 
Furthermore, he realized, the bag, if it was still in the state in which 
he lost it, would contain a can which would have in it the only Greek 
olive oil still surviving in the Universe. 
Slowly, carefully, inch by inch, he began to bob downwards, 
swinging gently from side to side like a nervous sheet of paper feeling 
its way towards the ground. 
It went well, he was feeling good. The air supported him, but let 
him through. Two minutes later he was hovering a mere two feet 
above the bag, and was faced with some difficult decision. He bobbed 
there lightly. He frowned, but again, as lightly as he could. 
If he picked the bag up, could he carry it? Mightn't the extra weight 
just pull him straight to the ground? 
Mightn't the mere act of touching something on the ground 
suddenly discharge whatever mysterious force it was that was holding 
him in the air? 
Mightn't he be better off just being sensible at this point and 
stepping out of the air, back on to the ground for a moment or two? 
If he did, would he ever be able to fly again? 
The sensation, when he allowed himself to be aware of it, was so 
quietly ecstatic that he could not bear the thought of losing it, 
perhaps for ever. With this worry in mind he bobbed upwards a little 
again, just to try the feel of it, the surprising and effortless movement 
of it. He bobbed, he floated. He tried a little swoop. 
The swoop was terrific. With his arms spread out in front of him, 
his hair and dressing gown streaming out behind him, he dived down 
out of the sky, bellied along a body of air about two feet from the 
ground and swung back up again, catching himself at the top of the 
swing and holding. Just holding. He stayed there. 
It was wonderful. 
And that, he realized, was the way of picking up the bag. He would 
swoop down and catch hold of it just at the point of the upswing. He 
would carry it on up with him. He might wobble a bit, but he was 
certain that he could hold it. 
He tried one or two more practice swoops, and they got better and 
better. The air on his face, the bounce and woof of his body, all 
combined to make him feel an intoxication of the spirit that he hadn't 
felt since, since ʹ well as far as he could work out, since he was born. 
He drifted away on the breeze and surveyed the countryside, which 
was, he discovered, pretty nasty. It had a wasted ravaged look. He 
decided not to look at it any more. He would just pick up the bag and 
then... he didn't know what he was going to do after he had picked up 
the bag. He decided he would just pick up the bag and see where 
things went from there. 
He judged himself against the wind, pushed up against it and 
turned around. He floated on its body. He didn't realize, but his body 
was willoming at this point. 
He ducked down under the airstream, dipped ʹ and dived. 
The air threw itself past him, he thrilled through it. The ground 
wobbled uncertainly, straightened its ideas out and rose smoothly up 
to meet him, offering the bag, its cracked plastic handles up towards 
him. 
Halfway down there was a sudden dangerous moment when he 
could no longer believe he was doing this, and therefore he very 
nearly wasn't, but he recovered himself in time, skimmed over the 
ground, slipped an arm smoothly through the handles of the bag, and 
began to climb back up, couldn't make it and all of a sudden collapsed, 
bruised, scratched and shaking in the stony ground. 
He staggered instantly to his feet and swayed hopelessly around, 
swinging the bag round him in agony of grief and disappointment. 
His feet, suddenly, were stuck heavily to the ground in the way 
they always had been. His body seemed like an unwieldy sack of 
potatoes that reeled stumbling against the ground, his mind had all 
the lightness of a bag of lead. 
He sagged and swayed and ached with giddiness. He tried 
hopelessly to run, but his legs were suddenly too weak. He tripped 
and flopped forward. At that moment he remembered that in the bag 
he was now carrying was not only a can of Greek olive oil but a duty`
free allowance of retsina, and in the pleasurable shock of that 
realization he failed to notice for at least ten seconds that he was now 
flying again. 
He whooped and cried with relief and pleasure, and sheer physical 
delight. He swooped, he wheeled, he skidded and whirled through the 
air. Cheekily he sat on an updraught and went through the contents 
of the hold`all. He felt the way he imagined an angel must feel during 
its celebrated dance on the head of a pin whilst being counted by 
philosophers. He laughed with pleasure at the discovery that the bag 
did in fact contain the olive oil and the retsina as well as a pair of 
cracked sunglasses, some sand`filled swimming trunks, some creased 
postcards of Santorini, a large and unsightly towel, some interesting 
stones, and various scraps of paper with the addresses of people he 
was relieved to think he would never meet again, even if the reason 
why was a sad one. He dropped the stones, put on the sunglasses, 
and let the pieces of paper whip away in the wind. 
Ten minutes later, drifting idly through a cloud, he got a large and 
extremely disreputable cocktail party in the small of the back. 
Chapter 19
The longest and most destructive party ever held is now into its 
fourth generation, and still no one shows any signs of leaving. 
Somebody did once look at his watch, but that was eleven years ago, 
and there has been no follow`up. 
The mess is extraordinary, and has to be seen to be believed, but if 
you don't have any particular need to believe it, then don't go and 
look, because you won't enjoy it. 
There have recently been some bangs and flashes up in the clouds, 
and there is one theory that this is a battle being fought between the 
fleets of several rival carpet`cleaning companies who are hovering 
over the thing like vultures, but you shouldn't believe anything you 
hear at parties, and particularly not anything you hear at this one. 
One of the problems, and it's one which is obviously going to get 
worse, is that all the people at the party are either the children or the 
grandchildren or the great`grandchildren of the people who wouldn't 
leave in the first place, and because of all the business about selective 
breeding and regressive genes and so on, it means that all the people 
now at the party are either absolutely fanatical partygoers, or 
gibbering idiots, or, more and more frequently, both. 
Either way, it means that, genetically speaking, each succeeding 
generation is now less likely to leave than the preceding one. 
So other factors come into operation, like when the drink is going 
to run out. 
Now, because of certain things which have happened which 
seemed like a good idea at the time (and one of the problems with a 
party which never stops is that all the things which only seem like a 
good idea at parties continue to seem like good ideas), that point 
seems still to be a long way off. 
One of the things which seemed like a good idea at the time was 
that the party should fly ʹ not in the normal sense that parties are 
meant to fly, but literally. 
One night, long ago, a band of drunken astro`engineers of the first 
generation clambered round the building digging this, fixing that, 
banging very hard on the other and when the sun rose the following 
morning, it was startled to find itself shining on a building full of 
happy drunken people which was now floating like a young and 
uncertain bird over the treetops. 
Not only that, but the flying party had also managed to arm itself 
rather heavily. If they were going to get involved in any petty 
arguments with wine merchants, they wanted to make sure they had 
might on their side. 
The transition from full`time cocktail party to part`time raiding 
party came with ease, and did much to add that extra bit of zest and 
swing to the whole affair which was badly needed at this point 
because of the enormous number of times that the band had already 
played all the numbers it knew over the years. 
They looted, they raided, they held whole cities for ransom for 
fresh supplies of cheese crackers, avocado dip, spare ribs and wine 
and spirits, which would now get piped aboard from floating tankers. 
The problem of when the drink is going to run out is, however, 
going to have to be faced one day. 
The planet over which they are floating is no longer the planet it 
was when they first started floating over it. 
It is in bad shape. 
The party had attacked and raided an awful lot of it, and no one 
has ever succeeded in hitting it back because of the erratic and 
unpredictable way in which it lurches round the sky. 
It is one hell of a party. 
It is also one hell of a thing to get hit by in the small of the back. 
Chapter 20
Arthur lay floundering in pain on a piece of ripped and 
dismembered reinforced concrete, flicked at by wisps of passing cloud 
and confused by the sounds of flabby merrymaking somewhere 
indistinctly behind him. 
There was a sound he couldn't immediately identify, partly because 
he didn't know the tune "I Left my Leg in Jaglan Beta" and partly 
because the band playing it were very tired, and some members of it 
were playing it in three`four time, some in four`four, and some in a 
kind of pie`eyed r2, each according to the amount of sleep he'd 
managed to grab recently. 
He lay, panting heavily in the wet air, and tried feeling bits of 
himself to see where he might be hurt. Wherever he touched himself, 
he encountered a pain. After a short while he worked out that this 
was because it was his hand that was hurting. He seemed to have 
sprained his wrist. His back, too, was hurting, but he soon satisfied 
himself that he was not badly hurt, but just bruised and a little shaken, 
as who wouldn't be? He couldn't understand what a building would 
be doing flying through the clouds. 
On the other hand, he would have been a little hard`pressed to 
come up with any convincing explanation of his own presence, so he 
decided that he and the building were just going to have to accept 
each other. He looked up from where he was lying. A wall of pale but 
stained stone slabs rose up behind him, the building proper. He 
seemed to be stretched out on some sort of ledge or lip which 
extended outwards for about three or four feet all the way around. It 
was a hunk of the ground in which the party building had had its 
foundations, and which it had taken along with itself to keep itself 
bound together at the bottom end. 
Nervously, he stood up and, suddenly, looking out over the edge, 
he felt nauseous with vertigo. He pressed himself back against the 
wall, wet with mist and sweat. His head was swimming freestyle, but 
someone in his stomach was doing the butterfly. 
Even though he had got up here under his own power, he could 
now not even bear to contemplate the hideous drop in front of him. 
He was not about to try his luck jumping. He was not about to move 
an inch closer to the edge. 
Clutching his hold`all he edged along the wall, hoping to find a 
doorway in. The solid weight of the can of olive oil was a great 
reassurance to him. 
He was edging in the direction of the nearest corner, in the hope 
that the wall around the corner might offer more in the way of 
entrances than this one, which offered none. 
The unsteadiness of the building's flight made him feel sick with 
fear, and after a short while he took the towel from out of his hold`all 
and did something with it which once again justified its supreme 
position in the list of useful things to take with you when you hitch`
hike round the Galaxy. He put it over his head so he wouldn't have to 
see what he was doing. 
His feet edged along the ground. His outstretched hand edged 
along the wall. 
Finally he came to the corner, and as his hand rounded the corner 
it encountered something which gave him such a shock that he nearly 
fell straight off. It was another hand. 
The two hands gripped each other. 
He desperately wanted to use his other hand to pull the towel back 
from his eyes, but it was holding the hold`all with the olive oil, the 
retsina and the postcards from Santorini, and he very much didn't 
want to put it down. 
He experienced one of those "self" moments, one of those 
moments when you suddenly turn around and look at yourself and 
think "Who am I? What am I up to? What have I achieved? Am I doing 
well?" He whimpered very slightly. 
He tried to free his hand, but he couldn't. The other hand was 
holding his tightly. He had no recourse but to edge onwards towards 
the corner. He leaned around it and shook his head in an attempt to 
dislodge the towel. This seemed to provoke a sharp cry of some 
unfashionable emotion from the owner of the other hand. 
The towel was whipped from his head and he found his eyes 
peering into those of Ford Prefect. Beyond him stood Slartibartfast, 
and beyond them he could clearly see a porchway and a large closed 
door. 
They were both pressed back against the wall, eyes wild with terror 
as they stared out into the thick blind cloud around them, and tried to 
resist the lurching and swaying of the building. 
"Where the zarking photon have you been?" hissed Ford, panic 
stricken. 
"Er, well," stuttered Arthur, not really knowing how to sum it all up 
that briefly. "Here and there. What are you doing here?" 
Ford turned his wild eyes on Arthur again. 
"They won't let us in without a bottle," he hissed. 
Chapter 21
The first thing Arthur noticed as they entered into the thick of the 
party, apart from the noise, the suffocating heat, the wild profusion of 
colours that protuded dimly through the atmosphere of heavy smoke, 
the carpets thick with ground glass, ash and avocado droppings, and 
the small group of pterodactyl`like creatures in lurex who descended 
on his cherished bottle of retsina, squawking, "A new pleasure, a new 
pleasure", was Trillian being chatted up by a Thunder God. 
"Didn't I see you at Milliways?" he was saying. 
"Were you the one with the hammer?" 
"Yes. I much prefer it here. So much less reputable, so much more 
fraught." 
Squeals of some hideous pleasure rang around the room, the outer 
dimensions of which were invisible through the heaving throng of 
happy, noisy creatures, cheerfully yelling things that nobody could 
hear at each other and occasionally having crises. 
"Seems fun," said Trillian. "What did you say, Arthur?" 
"I said, how the hell did you get here?" 
"I was a row of dots flowing randomly through the Universe. Have 
you met Thor? He makes thunder." 
"Hello," said Arthur. "I expect that must be very interesting." 
"Hi," said Thor. "It is. Have you got a drink?" 
"Er, no actually..." 
"Then why don't you go and get one?" 
"See you later, Arthur," said Trillian. 
Something jogged Arthur's mind, and he looked around huntedly. 
"Zaphod isn't here, is he?" he said. 
"See you," said Trillian firmly, "later." 
Thor glared at him with hard coal`black eyes, his beard bristled, 
what little light was there was in the place mustered its forces briefly 
to glint menacingly off the horns of his helmet. 
He took Trillian's elbow in his extremely large hand and the 
muscles in his upper arm moved around each other like a couple of 
Volkswagens parking. 
He led her away. 
"One of the interesting things about being immortal," he said, 
"is..." 
"One of the interesting things about space," Arthur heard 
Slartibartfast saying to a large and voluminous creature who looked 
like someone losing a fight with a pink duvet and was gazing raptly at 
the old man's deep eyes and silver beard, "is how dull it is." 
"Dull?" said the creature, and blinked her rather wrinkled and 
bloodshot eyes. 
"Yes," said Slartibartfast, "staggeringly dull. Bewilderingly so. You 
see, there's so much of it and so little in it. Would you like me to 
quote some statistics?" 
"Er, well..." 
"Please, I would like to. They, too, are quite sensationally dull." 
"I'll come back and hear them in a moment," she said, patting him 
on the arm, lifted up her skirts like a hovercraft and moved off into 
the heaving crown. 
"I thought she'd never go," growled the old man. "Come, 
Earthman..." 
"Arthur." 
"We must find the Silver Bail, it is here somewhere." 
"Can't we just relax a little?" Arthur said. "I've had a tough day. 
Trillian's here, incidentally, she didn't say how, it probably doesn't 
matter." 
"Think of the danger to the Universe..." 
"The Universe," said Arthur, "is big enough and old enough to look 
after itself for half an hour. All right," he added, in response to 
Slartibartfast's increasing agitation, "I'll wander round and see if 
anybody's seen it." 
"Good, good," said Slartibartfast, "good. " He plunged into the 
crowd himself, and was told to relax by everybody he passed. 
"Have you seen a bail anywhere?" said Arthur to a little man who 
seemed to be standing eagerly waiting to listen to somebody. "It's 
made of silver, vitally important for the future safety of the Universe, 
and about this long." 
"No," said the enthusiastically wizened little man, "but do have a 
drink and tell me all about it." 
Ford Prefect writhed past, dancing a wild, frenetic and not entirely 
unobscene dance with someone who looked as if she was wearing 
Sydney Opera House on her head. He was yelling a futile conversation 
at her above the din. 
"I like that hat " he bawled. 
"What?" 
"I said, I like the hat." 
"I'm not wearing a hat." 
"Well, I like the head, then." 
"What?" 
"I said, I like the head. Interesting bone`structure." 
"What?" 
Ford worked a shrug into the complex routine of other movements 
he was performing. 
"I said, you dance great," he shouted, "just don't nod so much." 
"What?" 
"It's just that every time you nod," said Ford, "... ow " he added as 
his partner nodded forward to say "What?" and once again pecked 
him sharply on the forehead with the sharp end of her swept`forward 
skull. 
"My planet was blown up one morning," said Arthur, who had 
found himself quite unexpectedly telling the little man his life story or, 
at least, edited highlights of it, "that's why I'm dressed like this, in my 
dressing gown. My planet was blown up with all my clothes in it, you 
see. I didn't realize I'd be coming to a party." 
The little man nodded enthusiastically. 
"Later, I was thrown off a spaceship. Still in my dressing gown. 
Rather than the space suit one would normally expect. Shortly after 
that I discovered that my planet had originally been built for a bunch 
of mice. You can imagine how I felt about that. I was then shot at for a 
while and blown up. In fact I have been blown up ridiculously often, 
shot at, insulted, regularly disintegrated, deprived of tea, and recently 
I crashed into a swamp and had to spend five years in a damp cave." 
"Ah," effervesced the little man, "and did you have a wonderful 
time?" 
Arthur started to choke violently on his drink. 
"What a wonderful exciting cough," said the little man, quite 
startled by it, "do you mind if I join you?" 
And with that he launched into the most extraordinary and 
spectacular fit of coughing which caught Arthur so much by surprise 
that he started to choke violently, discovered he was already doing it 
and got thoroughly confused. 
Together they performed a lung`busting duet which went on for 
fully two minutes before Arthur managed to cough and splutter to a 
halt. 
"So invigorating," said the little man, panting and wiping tears from 
his eyes. "What an exciting life you must lead. Thank you very much." 
He shook Arthur warmly by the hand and walked off into the crowd. 
Arthur shook his head in astonishment. 
A youngish`looking man came up to him, an aggressive`looking 
type with a hook mouth, a lantern nose, and small beady little 
cheekbones. He was wearing black trousers, a black silk shirt open to 
what was presumably his navel, though Arthur had learnt never to 
make assumptions about the anatomies of the sort of people he 
tended to meet these days, and had all sorts of nasty dangly gold 
things hanging round his neck. He carried something in a black bag, 
and clearly wanted people to notice that he didn't want them to 
notice it. 
"Hey, er, did I hear you say your name just now?" he said. 
This was one of the many things that Arthur had told the 
enthusiastic little man. 
"Yes, it's Arthur Dent." 
The man seemed to be dancing slightly to some rhythm other than 
any of the several that the band were grimly pushing out. 
"Yeah," he said, "only there was a man in a mountain wanted to 
see you." 
"I met him." 
"Yeah, only he seemed pretty anxious about it, you know." 
"Yes, I met him." 
"Yeah, well I think you should know that." 
"I do. I met him." 
The man paused to chew a little gum. Then he clapped Arthur on 
the back. 
"OK," he said, "all right. I'm just telling you, right? Good night, good 
luck, win awards." 
"What?" said Arthur, who was beginning to flounder seriously at 
this point. 
"Whatever. Do what you do. Do it well." He made a sort of clucking 
noise with whatever he was chewing and then some vaguely dynamic 
gesture. 
"Why?" said Arthur. 
"Do it badly," said the man, "who cares? Who gives a shit?" The 
blood suddenly seemed to pump angrily into the man's face and he 
started to shout. 
"Why not go mad?" he said. "Go away, get off my back will you, 
guy. Just zark off   " 
"OK, I'm going," said Arthur hurriedly. 
"It's been real." The man gave a sharp wave and disappeared off 
into the throng. 
"What was that about?" said Arthur to a girl he found standing 
beside him. "Why did he tell me to win awards?" 
"Just showbiz talk," shrugged the girl. "He's just won an award at 
the Annual Ursa Minor Alpha Recreational Illusions Institute Awards 
Ceremony, and was hoping to be able to pass it off lightly, only you 
didn't mention it, so he couldn't." 
"Oh," said Arthur, "oh, well I'm sorry I didn't. What was it for?" 
"The Most Gratuitous Use Of The Word 'Fuck' In A Serious 
Screenplay. It's very prestigious." 
"I see," said Arthur, "yes, and what do you get for that?" 
"A Rory. It's just a small silver thing set on a large black base. What 
did you say?" 
"I didn't say anything. I was just about to ask what the silver..." 
"Oh, I thought you said 'wop'." 
"Said what?" 
"Wop." 
Chapter 22
People had been dropping in on the party now for some years, 
fashionable gatecrashers from other worlds, and for some time it had 
occurred to the partygoers as they had looked out at their own world 
beneath them, with its wrecked cities, its ravaged avocado farms and 
blighted vineyards, its vast tracts of new desert, its seas full of biscuit 
crumbs and worse, that their world was in some tiny and almost 
imperceptible ways not quite as much fun as it had been. Some of 
them had begun to wonder if they could manage to stay sober for 
long enough to make the entire party spaceworthy and maybe take it 
off to some other people's worlds where the air might be fresher and 
give them fewer headaches. 
The few undernourished farmers who still managed to scratch out 
a feeble existence on the half`dead ground of the planet's surface 
would have been extremely pleased to hear this, but that day, as the 
party came screaming out of the clouds and the farmers looked up in 
haggard fear of yet another cheese`and`wine raid, it became clear 
that the party was not going to be going anywhere else for a while, 
that the party would soon be over. Very soon it would be time to 
gather up hats and coats and stagger blearily outside to find out what 
time of day it was, what time of year it was, and whether in any of 
this burnt and ravaged land there was a taxi going anywhere. 
The party was locked in a horrible embrace with a strange white 
spaceship which seemed to be half sticking through it. Together they 
were lurching, heaving and spinning their way round the sky in 
grotesque disregard of their own weight. 
The clouds parted. The air roared and leapt out of their way. 
The party and the Krikkit warship looked, in their writhings, a little 
like two ducks, one of which is trying to make a third duck inside the 
second duck, whilst the second duck is trying very hard to explain that 
it doesn't feel ready for a third duck right now, is uncertain that it 
would want any putative third duck to be made by this particular first 
duck anyway, and certainly not whilst it, the second duck, was busy 
flying. 
The sky sang and screamed with the rage of it all and buffeted the 
ground with shock waves. 
And suddenly, with a foop, the Krikkit ship was gone. 
The party blundered helplessly across the sky like a man leaning 
against an unexpectedly open door. It span and wobbled on its hover 
jets. It tried to right itself and wronged itself instead. It staggered back 
across the sky again. 
For a while these staggerings continued, but clearly they could not 
continue for long. The party was now a mortally wounded party. All 
the fun had gone out of it, as the occasional broken`backed pirouette 
could not disguise. 
The longer, at this point, that it avoided the ground, the heavier 
was going to be the crash when finally it hit it. 
Inside, things were not going well either. They were going 
monstrously badly, in fact, and people were hating it and saying so 
loudly. The Krikkit robots had been. 
They had removed the Award for The Most Gratuitous Use Of The 
Word 'Fuck' In A Serious Screenplay, and in its place had left a scene 
of devastation that left Arthur feeling almost as sick as a runner`up 
for a Rory. 
"We would love to stay and help," shouted Ford, picking his way 
over the mangled debris, "only we're not going to." 
The party lurched again, provoking feverish cries and groans from 
amongst the smoking wreckage. 
"We have to go and save the Universe, you see," said Ford. "And if 
that sounds like a pretty lame excuse, then you may be right. Either 
way, we're off." 
He suddenly came across an unopened bottle lying, miraculously 
unbroken, on the ground. 
"Do you mind if we take this?" he said. "You won't be needing it." 
He took a packet of potato crisps too. 
"Trillian?" shouted Arthur in a shocked and weakened voice. In the 
smoking mess he could see nothing. 
"Earthman, we must go," said Slartibartfast nervously. 
"Trillian?" shouted Arthur again. 
A moment or two later, Trillian staggered, shaking, into view, 
supported by her new friend the Thunder God. 
"The girl stays with me," said Thor. "There's a great party going on 
in Valhalla, we'll be flying off..." 
"Where were you when all this was going on?" said Arthur. 
"Upstairs," said Thor, "I was weighing her. Flying's a tricky business 
you see, you have to calculate wind..." 
"She comes with us," said Arthur. 
"Hey," said Trillian, "don't I..." 
"No," said Arthur, "you come with us." 
Thor looked at him with slowly smouldering eyes. He was making 
some point about godliness and it had nothing to do with being clean. 
"She comes with me," he said quietly. 
"Come on, Earthman," said Slartibartfast nervously, picking at 
Arthur's sleeve. 
"Come on, Slartibartfast," said Ford, picking at the old man's sleeve. 
Slartibartfast had the teleport device. 
The party lurched and swayed, sending everyone reeling, except 
for Thor and except for Arthur, who stared, shaking, into the Thunder 
God's black eyes. 
Slowly, incredibly, Arthur put up what appeared to be his tiny little 
fists. 
"Want to make something of it?" he said. 
"I beg your minuscule pardon?" roared Thor. 
"I said," repeated Arthur, and he could not keep the quavering out 
of his voice, "do you want to make something of it?" He waggled his 
fists ridiculously. 
Thor looked at him with incredulity. Then a little wisp of smoke 
curled upwards from his nostril. There was a tiny little flame in it too. 
He gripped his belt. 
He expanded his chest to make it totally clear that here was the 
sort of man you only dared to cross if you had a team of Sherpas with 
you. 
He unhooked the shaft of his hammer from his belt. He held it up in 
his hands to reveal the massive iron head. He thus cleared up any 
possible misunderstanding that he might merely have been carrying a 
telegraph pole around with him. 
"Do I want," he said, with a hiss like a river flowing through a steel 
mill, "to make something of it?" 
"Yes," said Arthur, his voice suddenly and extraordinarily strong 
and belligerent. He waggled his fists again, this time as if he meant it. 
"You want to step outside?" he snarled at Thor. 
"All right " bellowed Thor, like an enraged bull (or in fact like an 
enraged Thunder God, which is a great deal more impressive), and did 
so. 
"Good," said Arthur, "that's got rid of him. Slarty, get us out of 
here." 
Chapter 23
"All right," shouted Ford at Arthur, "so I'm a coward, the point is 
I'm still alive." They were back aboard the Starship Bistromath, so was 
Slartibartfast, so was Trillian. Harmony and concord were not. 
"Well, so am I alive, aren't I?" retaliated Arthur, haggard with 
adventure and anger. His eyebrows were leaping up and down as if 
they wanted to punch each other. 
"You damn nearly weren't," exploded Ford. 
Arthur turned sharply to Slartibartfast, who was sitting in his pilot 
couch on the flight deck gazing thoughtfully into the bottom of a 
bottle which was telling him something he clearly couldn't fathom. He 
appealed to him. 
"Do you think he understands the first word I've been saying?" he 
said, quivering with emotion. 
"I don't know," replied Slartibartfast, a little abstractedly. "I'm not 
sure," he added, glancing up very briefly, "that I do." He stared at his 
instruments with renewed vigor and bafflement. "You'll have to 
explain it to us again," he said. 
"Well..." 
"But later. Terrible things are afoot." 
He tapped the pseudo`glass of the bottle bottom. 
"We fared rather pathetically at the party, I'm afraid," he said, "and 
our only hope now is to try to prevent the robots from using the Key 
in the Lock. How in heaven we do that I don't know," he muttered. 
"Just have to go there, I suppose. Can't say I like the idea at all. 
Probably end up dead." 
"Where is Trillian anyway?" said Arthur with a sudden affectation 
of unconcern. What he had been angry about was that Ford had 
berated him for wasting time over all the business with the Thunder 
God when they could have been making a rather more rapid escape. 
Arthur's own opinion, and he had offered it for whatever anybody 
might have felt it was worth, was that he had been extraordinarily 
brave and resourceful. 
The prevailing view seemed to be that his opinion was not worth a 
pair of fetid dingo's kidneys. What really hurt, though, was that 
Trillian didn't seem to react much one way or the other and had 
wandered off somewhere. 
"And where are my potato crisps?" said Ford. 
"They are both," said Slartibartfast, without looking up, "in the 
Room of Informational Illusions. I think that your young lady friend is 
trying to understand some problems of Galactic history. I think the 
potato crisps are probably helping her." 
Chapter 24
It is a mistake to think you can solve any major problems just with 
potatoes. 
For instance, there was once an insanely aggressive race of people 
called the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax. That was just the name of 
their race. The name of their army was something quite horrific. 
Luckily they lived even further back in Galactic history than anything 
we have so far encountered ʹ twenty billion years ago ʹ when the 
Galaxy was young and fresh, and every idea worth fighting for was a 
new one. 
And fighting was what the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax were 
good at, and being good at it, they did a lot. They fought their 
enemies (i.e. everybody else), they fought each other. Their planet 
was a complete wreck. The surface was littered with abandoned cities 
which were surrounded by abandoned war machines, which were in 
turn surrounded by deep bunkers in which the Silastic Armorfiends 
lived and squabbled with each other. 
The best way to pick a fight with a Silastic Armorfiend was just to 
be born. They didn't like it, they got resentful. And when an 
Armorfiend got resentful, someone got hurt. An exhausting way of life, 
one might think, but they did seem to have an awful lot of energy. 
The best way of dealing with a Silastic Armorfiend was to put him 
into a room of his own, because sooner or later he would simply beat 
himself up. 
Eventually they realized that this was something they were going 
to have to sort out, and they passed a law decreeing that anyone who 
had to carry a weapon as part of his normal Silastic work (policemen, 
security guards, primary school teachers, etc.) had to spend at least 
forty`five minutes every day punching a sack of potatoes in order to 
work off his or her surplus aggressions. 
For a while this worked well, until someone thought that it would 
be much more efficient and less time`consuming if they just shot the 
potatoes instead. 
This led to a renewed enthusiasm for shooting all sorts of things, 
and they all got very excited at the prospect of their first major war 
for weeks. 
Another achievement of the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax is that 
they were the first race who ever managed to shock a computer. 
It was a gigantic spaceborne computer called Hactar, which to this 
day is remembered as one of the most powerful ever built. It was the 
first to be built like a natural brain, in that every cellular particle of it 
carried the pattern of the whole within it, which enabled it to think 
more flexibly and imaginatively, and also, it seemed, to be shocked. 
The Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax were engaged in one of their 
regular wars with the Strenuous Garfighters of Stug, and were not 
enjoying it as much as usual because it involved an awful lot of 
trekking through the Radiation Swamps of Cwulzenda, and across the 
Fire Mountains of Frazfraga, neither of which terrains they felt at 
home in. 
So when the Strangulous Stilettans of Jajazikstak joined in the fray 
and forced them to fight another front in the Gamma Caves of Carfrax 
and the Ice Storms of Varlengooten, they decided that enough was 
enough, and they ordered Hactar to design for them an Ultimate 
Weapon. 
"What do you mean," asked Hactar, "by Ultimate?" 
To which the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax said, "Read a bloody 
dictionary," and plunged back into the fray. 
So Hactar designed an Ultimate Weapon. 
It was a very, very small bomb which was simply a junction box in 
hyperspace that would, when activated, connect the heart of every 
major sun with the heart of every other major sun simultaneously and 
thus turn the entire Universe in to one gigantic hyperspatial 
supernova. 
When the Silastic Armorfiends tried to use it to blow up a 
Strangulous Stilettan munitions dump in one of the Gamma Caves, 
they were extremely irritated that it didn't work, and said so. 
Hactar had been shocked by the whole idea. 
He tried to explain that he had been thinking about this Ultimate 
Weapon business, and had worked out that there was no conceivable 
consequence of not setting the bomb off that was worse than the 
known consequence of setting it off, and he had therefore taken the 
liberty of introducing a small flaw into the design of the bomb, and he 
hoped that everyone involved would, on sober reflection, feel that... 
The Silastic Armorfiends disagreed and pulverized the computer. 
Later they thought better of it, and destroyed the faulty bomb as 
well. 
Then, pausing only to smash the hell out of the Strenuous 
Garfighters of Stug, and the Strangulous Stilettans of Jajazikstak, they 
went on to find an entirely new way of blowing themselves up, which 
was a profound relief to everyone else in the Galaxy, particularly the 
Garfighters, the Stilettans and the potatoes. 
Trillian had watched all this, as well as the story of Krikkit. She 
emerged from the Room of informational Illusions thoughtfully, just 
in time to discover that they had arrived too late. 
Chapter 25
Even as the Starship Bistromath flickered into objective being on 
the top of a small cliff on the mile`wide asteroid which pursued a 
lonely and eternal path in orbit around the enclosed star system of 
Krikkit, its crew was aware that they were in time only to be witnesses 
to an unstoppable historic event. 
They didn't realize they were going to see two. 
They stood cold, lonely and helpless on the cliff edge and watched 
the activity below. Lances of light wheeled in sinister arcs against the 
void from a point only about a hundred yards below and in front of 
them. 
They stared into the blinding event. 
An extension of the ship's field enabled them to stand there, by 
once again exploiting the mind's predisposition to have tricks played 
on it: the problems of falling up off the tiny mass of the asteroid, or of 
not being able to breathe, simply became Somebody Else's. 
The white Krikkit warship was parked amongst the stark grey crags 
of the asteroid, alternately flaring under arclights or disappearing in 
shadow. The blackness of the shaped shadows cast by the hard rocks 
danced together in wild choreography as the arclights swept round 
them. 
The eleven white robots were bearing, in procession, the Wikkit 
Key out into the middle of a circle of swinging lights. 
The Wikkit Key was rebuilt. Its components shone and glittered: 
the Steel Pillar (or Marvin's leg) of Strength and Power, the Gold Bail 
(or Heart of the Improbability Drive) of Prosperity, the Perspex Pillar 
(or Argabuthon Sceptre of Justice) of Science and Reason, the Silver 
Bail (or Rory Award for The Most Gratuitous Use Of The Word "Fuck" 
In A Serious Screenplay) and the now reconstituted Wooden Pillar (or 
Ashes of a burnt stump signifying the death of English cricket) of 
Nature and Spirituality. 
"I suppose there is nothing we can do at this point?" asked Arthur 
nervously. 
"No," sighed Slartibartfast. 
The expression of disappointment which crossed Arthur's face was 
a complete failure, and, since he was standing obscured by shadow, 
he allowed it to collapse into one of relief. 
"Pity," he said. 
"We have no weapons," said Slartibartfast, "stupidly." 
"Damn," said Arthur very quietly. 
Ford said nothing. 
Trillian said nothing, but in a peculiarly thoughtful and distinct way. 
She was staring at the blankness of the space beyond the asteroid. 
The asteroid circled the Dust Cloud which surrounded the Slo`Time 
envelope which enclosed the world on which lived the people of 
Krikkit, the Masters of Krikkit and their killer robots. 
The helpless group had no way of knowing whether or not the 
Krikkit robots were aware of their presence. They could only assume 
that they must be, but that they felt, quite rightly in the 
circumstances, that they had nothing to fear. They had an historic 
task to perform, and their audience could be regarded with contempt. 
"Terrible impotent feeling, isn't it?" said Arthur, but the others 
ignored him. 
In the centre of the area of light which the robots were 
approaching, a square`shaped crack appeared in the ground. The 
crack defined itself more and more distinctly, and soon it became 
clear that a block of the ground, about six feet square, was slowly 
rising. 
At the same time they became aware of some other movement, 
but it was almost sublimal, and for a moment or two it was not clear 
what it was that was moving. 
Then it became clear. 
The asteroid was moving. It was moving slowly in towards the Dust 
Cloud, as if being hauled in inexorably by some celestial angler in its 
depths. 
They were to make in real life the journey through the Cloud which 
they had already made in the Room of Informational Illusions. They 
stood frozen in silence. Trillian frowned. 
An age seemed to pass. Events seemed to pass with spinning 
slowness, as the leading edge of the asteroid passed into the vague 
and soft outer perimeter of the Cloud. 
And soon they were engulfed in a thin and dancing obscurity. They 
passed on through it, on and on, dimly aware of vague shapes and 
whorls indistinguishable in the darkness except in the corner of the 
eye. 
The Dust dimmed the shafts of brilliant light. The shafts of brilliant 
light twinkled on the myriad specks of Dust. 
Trillian, again, regarded the passage from within her own frowning 
thoughts. 
And they were through it. Whether it had taken a minute or half an 
hour they weren't sure, but they were through it and confronted with 
a fresh blankness, as if space were pinched out of existence in front of 
them. 
And now things moved quickly. 
A blinding shaft of light seemed almost to explode from out of the 
block which had risen three feet out of the ground, and out of that 
rose a smaller Perspex block, dazzling with interior dancing colours. 
The block was slotted with deep groves, three upright and two 
across, clearly designed to accept the Wikkit key. 
The robots approached the Lock, slotted the Key into its home and 
stepped back again. The block twisted round of is own accord, and 
space began to alter. 
As space unpinched itself, it seemed agonizingly to twist the eyes 
of the watchers in their sockets. They found themselves staring, 
blinded, at an unravelled sun which stood now before them where it 
seemed only seconds before there had not been even empty space. It 
was a second or two before they were even sufficiently aware of what 
had happened to throw their hands up over their horrified blinded 
eyes. In that second or two, they were aware of a tiny speck moving 
slowly across the eye of that sun. 
They staggered back, and heard ringing in their ears the thin and 
unexpected chant of the robots crying out in unison. 
"Krikkit  Krikkit  Krikkit  Krikkit " 
The sound chilled them. It was harsh, it was cold, it was empty, it 
was mechanically dismal. 
It was also triumphant. 
They were so stunned by these two sensory shocks that they 
almost missed the second historic event. 
Zaphod Beeblebrox, the only man in history to survive a direct blast 
attack from the Krikkit robots, ran out of the Krikkit warship 
brandishing a Zap gun. 
"OK," he cried, "the situation is totally under control as of this 
moment in time." 
The single robot guarding the hatchway to the ship silently swung 
his battleclub, and connected it with the back of Zaphod's left head. 
"Who the zark did that?" said the left head, and lolled sickeningly 
forward. 
His right head gazed keenly into the middle distance. 
"Who did what?" it said. 
The club connected with the back of his right head. 
Zaphod measured his length as a rather strange shape on the 
ground. 
Within a matter of seconds the whole event was over. A few blasts 
from the robots were sufficient to destroy the Lock for ever. It split 
and melted and splayed its contents brokenly. The robots marched 
grimly and, it almost seemed, in a slightly disheartened manner, back 
into their warship which, with a "foop", was gone. 
Trillian and Ford ran hectically round and down the steep incline to 
the dark, still body of Zaphod Beeblebrox. 
Chapter 26
"I don't know," said Zaphod, for what seemed to him like the thirty`
seventh time, "they could have killed me, but they didn't. Maybe they 
just thought I was a kind of wonderful guy or something. I could 
understand that." 
The others silently registered their opinions of this theory. 
Zaphod lay on the cold floor of the flight deck. His back seemed to 
wrestle the floor as pain thudded through him and banged at his 
heads. 
"I think," he whispered, "that there is something wrong with those 
anodized dudes, something fundamentally weird." 
"They are programmed to kill everybody," Slartibartfast pointed 
out. 
"That," wheezed Zaphod between the whacking thuds, "could be 
it." He didn't seem altogether convinced. 
"Hey, baby," he said to Trillian, hoping this would make up for his 
previous behaviour. 
"You all right?" she said gently. 
"Yeah," he said, "I'm fine." 
"Good," she said, and walked away to think. She stared at the huge 
visiscreen over the flight couches and, twisting a switch, she flipped 
local images over it. One image was the blankness of the Dust Cloud. 
One was the sun of Krikkit. One was Krikkit itself. She flipped between 
them fiercely. 
"Well, that's goodbye Galaxy, then," said Arthur, slapping his knees 
and standing up. 
"No," said Slartibartfast, gravely. "Our course is clear." He furrowed 
his brow until you could grow some of the smaller root vegetables in 
it. He stood up, he paced around. When he spoke again, what he said 
frightened him so much he had to sit down again. 
"We must go down to Krikkit," he said. A deep sigh shook his old 
frame and his eyes seemed almost to rattle in their sockets. 
"Once again," he said, "we have failed pathetically. Quite 
pathetically." 
"That," said Ford quietly, "is because we don't care enough. I told 
you." 
He swung his feet up on the instrument panel and picked fitfully at 
something on one of his fingernails. 
"But unless we determine to take action," said the old man 
querulously, as if struggling against something deeply insouciant in his 
nature, "then we shall all be destroyed, we shall all die. Surely we care 
about that?" 
"Not enough to want to get killed over it," said Ford. He put on a 
sort of hollow smile and flipped it round the room at anyone who 
wanted to see it. 
Slartibartfast clearly found this point of view extremely seductive 
and he fought against it. He turned again to Zaphod who was gritting 
his teeth and sweating with the pain. 
"You surely must have some idea," he said, "of why they spared 
your life. It seems most strange and unusual." 
"I kind of think they didn't even know," shrugged Zaphod. "I told 
you. They hit me with the most feeble blast, just knocked me out, 
right? They lugged me into their ship, dumped me into a corner and 
ignored me. Like they were embarrassed about me being there. If I 
said anything they knocked me out again. We had some great 
conversations. 'Hey... ugh ' 'Hi there... ugh ' 'I wonder...ugh ' Kept me 
amused for hours, you know." He winced again. 
He was toying with something in his fingers. He held it up. It was 
the Gold Bail ʹ the Heart of Gold, the heart of the Infinite 
Improbability Drive. Only that and the Wooden Pillar had survived the 
destruction of the Lock intact. 
"I hear your ship can move a bit," he said. "So how would you like 
to zip me back to mine before you..." 
"Will you not help us?" said Slartibartfast. 
"I'd love to stay and help you save the Galaxy," insisted Zaphod, 
rising himself up on to his shoulders, "but I have the mother and 
father of a pair of headaches, and I feel a lot of little headaches 
coming on. But next time it needs saving, I'm your guy. Hey, Trillian 
baby?" 
She looked round briefly. 
"Yes?" 
"You want to come? Heart of Gold? Excitement and adventure and 
really wild things?" 
"I'm going down to Krikkit," she said. 
Chapter 27
It was the same hill, and yet not the same. 
This time it was not an Informational Illusion. This was Krikkit itself 
and they were standing on it. Near them, behind the trees, stood the 
strange Italian restaurant which had brought these, their real bodies, 
to this, the real, present world of Krikkit.
The strong grass under their feet was real, the rich soil real too. The 
heady fragrances from the tree, too, were real. The night was real 
night. 
Krikkit. 
Possibly the most dangerous place in the Galaxy for anyone who 
isn't a Krikkiter to stand. The place that could not countenance the 
existence of any other place, whose charming, delightful, intelligent 
inhabitants would howl with fear, savagery and murderous hate when 
confronted with anyone not their own. 
Arthur shuddered. 
Slartibartfast shuddered. 
Ford, surprisingly, shuddered. 
It was not surprising that he shuddered, it was surprising that he 
was there at all. But when they had returned Zaphod to his ship Ford 
had felt unexpectedly shamed into not running away. 
Wrong, he thought to himself, wrong wrong wrong. He hugged to 
himself one of the Zap guns with which they had armed themselves 
out of Zaphod's armoury. 
Trillian shuddered, and frowned as she looked into the sky. 
This, too, was not the same. It was no longer blank and empty. 
Whilst the countryside around them had changed little in the two 
thousand years of the Krikkit wars, and the mere five years that had 
elapsed locally since Krikkit was sealed in its Slo`Time envelope ten 
billion years ago, the sky was dramatically different. 
Dim lights and heavy shapes hung in it. 
High in the sky, where no Krikkiter ever looked, were the War 
Zones, the Robot Zones ʹ huge warships and tower blocks floating in 
the Nil`O`Grav fields far above the idyllic pastoral lands of the surface 
of Krikkit. 
Trillian stared at them and thought. 
"Trillian," whispered Ford Prefect to her. 
"Yes?" she said. 
"What are you doing?" 
"Thinking." 
"Do you always breathe like that when you're thinking?" 
"I wasn't aware that I was breathing." 
"That's what worried me." 
"I think I know..." said Trillian. 
"Shhhh " said Slartibartfast in alarm, and his thin trembling hand 
motioned them further back beneath the shadow of the tree. 
Suddenly, as before in the tape, there were lights coming along the 
hill path, but this time the dancing beams were not from lanterns but 
electric torches ʹ not in itself a dramatic change, but every detail 
made their hearts thump with fear. This time there were no lilting 
whimsical songs about flowers and farming and dead dogs, but 
hushed voices in urgent debate. 
A light moved in the sky with slow weight. Arthur was clenched 
with a claustrophobic terror and the warm wind caught at his throat. 
Within seconds a second party became visible, approaching from 
the other side of the dark hill. They were moving swiftly and 
purposefully, their torches swinging and probing around them. 
The parties were clearly converging, and not merely with each 
other. They were converging deliberately on the spot where Arthur 
and the others were standing. 
Arthur heard the slight rustle as Ford Prefect raised his Zap gun to 
his shoulder, and the slight whimpering cough as Slartibartfast raised 
his. He felt the cold unfamiliar weight of his own gun, and with 
shaking hands he raised it. 
His fingers fumbled to release the safety catch and engage the 
extreme danger catch as Ford had shown him. He was shaking so 
much that if he'd fired at anybody at that moment he probably would 
have burnt his signature on them. 
Only Trillian didn't raise her gun. She raised her eyebrows, lowered 
them again, and bit her lip in thought. 
"Has it occurred to you," she began, but nobody wanted to discuss 
anything much at the moment. 
A light stabbed through the darkness from behind them and they 
span around to find a third party of Krikkiters behind them, searching 
them out with their torches. 
Ford Prefect's gun crackled viciously, but fire spat back at it and it 
crashed from his hands. 
There was a moment of pure fear, a frozen second before anyone 
fired again. 
And at the end of the second nobody fired. 
They were surrounded by pale`faced Krikkiters and bathed in 
bobbing torch light. 
The captives stared at their captors, the captors stared at their 
captives. 
"Hello?" said one of the captors. "Excuse me, but are you... aliens?" 
Chapter 28
Meanwhile, more millions of miles away than the mind can 
comfortably encompass, Zaphod Beeblebrox was throwing a mood 
again. 
He had repaired his ship ʹ that is, he'd watched with alert interest 
whilst a service robot had repaired it for him. It was now, once again, 
one of the most powerful and extraordinary ships in existence. He 
could go anywhere, do anything. He fiddled with a book, and then 
tossed it away. It was the one he'd read before. 
He walked over to the communications bank and opened an all`
frequencies emergency channel. 
"Anyone want a drink?" he said. 
"This an emergency, feller?" crackled a voice from halfway across 
the Galaxy. 
"Got any mixers?" said Zaphod. 
"Go take a ride on a comet." 
"OK, OK," said Zaphod and flipped the channel shut again. He 
sighed and sat down. He got up again and wandered over to a 
computer screen. He pushed a few buttons. Little blobs started to 
rush around the screen eating each other. 
"Pow " said Zaphod. "Freeeoooo  Pop pop pop " 
"Hi there," said the computer brightly after a minute of this, "you 
have scored three points. Previous best score, seven million five 
hundred and ninety`seven thousand, two hundred and..." 
"OK, OK," said Zaphod and flipped the screen blank again. 
He sat down again. He played with a pencil. This too began slowly 
to lose its fascination. 
"OK, OK," he said, and fed his score and the previous one into the 
computer. 
His ship made a blur of the Universe. 
Chapter 29
"Tell us," said the thin, pale`faced Krikkiter who had stepped 
forward from the ranks of the others and stood uncertainly in the 
circle of torchlight, handling his gun as if he was just holding it for 
someone else who'd just popped off somewhere but would be back in 
a minute, "do you know anything about something called the Balance 
of Nature?" 
There was no reply from their captives, or at least nothing more 
articulate than a few confused mumbles and grunts. The torchlight 
continued to play over them. High in the sky above them dark activity 
continued in the Robot zones. 
"It's just," continued the Krikkiter uneasily, "something we heard 
about, probably nothing important. Well, I suppose we'd better kill 
you then." 
He looked down at his gun as if he was trying to find which bit to 
press. 
"That is," he said, looking up again, "unless there's anything you 
want to chat about?" 
Slow, numb astonishment crept up the bodies of Slartibartfast, 
Ford and Arthur. Very soon it would reach their brains, which were at 
the moment solely occupied with moving their jawbones up and 
down. Trillian was shaking her head as if trying to finish a jigsaw by 
shaking the box. 
"We're worried, you see," said another man from the crowd, 
"about this plan of universal destruction." 
"Yes," added another, "and the balance of nature. It just seemed to 
us that if the whole of the rest of the Universe is destroyed it will 
somehow upset the balance of nature. We're quite keen on ecology, 
you see." His voice trailed away unhappily. 
"And sport," said another, loudly. This got a cheer of approval from 
the others. 
"Yes," agreed the first, "and sport..." He looked back at his fellows 
uneasily and scratched fitfully at his cheek. He seemed to be wrestling 
with some deep inner confusion, as if everything he wanted to say 
and everything he thought were entirely different things, between 
which he could see no possible connection. 
"You see," he mumbled, "some of us..." and he looked around 
again as if for confirmation. The others made encouraging noises. 
"Some of us," he continued, "are quite keen to have sporting links 
with the rest of the Galaxy, and though I can see the argument about 
keeping sport out of politics, I think that if we want to have sporting 
links with the rest of the Galaxy, which we do, then it's probably a 
mistake to destroy it. And indeed the rest of the Universe..." his voice 
trailed away again "... which is what seems to be the idea now..." 
"Wh..." said Slartibartfast. "Wh..." 
"Hhhh... ?" said Arthur. 
"Dr..." said Ford Prefect.
"OK," said Trillian. "Let's talk about it." She walked forward and 
took the poor confused Krikkiter by the arm. He looked about twenty`
five, which meant, because of the peculiar manglings of time that had 
been going on in this area, that he would have been just twenty when 
the Krikkit Wars were finished, ten billion years ago. 
Trillian led him for a short walk through the torchlight before she 
said anything more. He stumbled uncertainly after her. The encircling 
torch beams were drooping now slightly as if they were abdicating to 
this strange, quiet girl who alone in the Universe of dark confusion 
seemed to know what she was doing. 
She turned and faced him, and lightly held both his arms. He was a 
picture of bewildered misery. 
"Tell me," she said. 
He said nothing for a moment, whilst his gaze darted from one of 
her eyes to the other. 
"We..." he said, "we have to be alone... I think." He screwed up his 
face and then dropped his head forward, shaking it like someone 
trying to shake a coin out of a money box. He looked up again. "We 
have this bomb now, you see," he said, "it's just a little one." 
"I know," she said. 
He goggled at her as if she'd said something very strange about 
beetroots. 
"Honestly," he said, "it's very, very little." 
"I know," she said again. 
"But they say," his voice trailed on, "they say it can destroy 
everything that exists. And we have to do that, you see, I think. Will 
that make us alone? I don't know. It seems to be our function, 
though," he said, and dropped his head again. 
"Whatever that means," said a hollow voice from the crowd. 
Trillian slowly put her arms around the poor bewildered young 
Krikkiter and patted his trembling head on her shoulder. 
"It's all right," she said quietly but clearly enough for all the 
shadowy crowd to hear, "you don't have to do it." 
She rocked him. 
"You don't have to do it," she said again. 
She let him go and stood back. 
"I want you to do something for me," she said, and unexpectedly 
laughed. 
"I want," she said, and laughed again. She put her hand over her 
mouth and then said with a straight face, "I want you to take me to 
your leader," and she pointed into the War Zones in the sky. She 
seemed somehow to know that their leader would be there. 
Her laughter seemed to discharge something in the atmosphere. 
From somewhere at the back of the crowd a single voice started to 
sing a tune which would have enabled Paul McCartney, had he 
written it, to buy the world. 
Chapter 30
Zaphod Beeblebrox crawled bravely along a tunnel, like the hell of 
a guy he was. He was very confused, but continued crawling doggedly 
anyway because he was that brave. 
He was confused by something he had just seen, but not half as 
confused as he was going to be by something he was about to hear, 
so it would now be best to explain exactly where he was. 
He was in the Robot War Zones many miles above the surface of 
the planet Krikkit. 
The atmosphere was thin here and relatively unprotected from any 
rays or anything which space might care to hurl in his direction. 
He had parked the starship Heart of Gold amongst the huge jostling 
dim hulks that crowded the sky here above Krikkit, and had entered 
what appeared to be the biggest and most important of the sky 
buildings, armed with nothing but a Zap gun and something for his 
headaches. 
He had found himself in a long, wide and badly lit corridor in which 
he was able to hide until he worked out what he was going to do next. 
He hid because every now and then one of the Krikkit robots would 
walk along it, and although he had so far led some kind of charmed 
life at their hands, it had nevertheless been an extremely painful one, 
and he had no desire to stretch what he was only half`inclined to call 
his good fortune. 
He had ducked, at one point, into a room leading off the corridor, 
and had discovered it to be a huge and, again, dimly lit chamber. 
In fact, it was a museum with just one exhibit ʹ the wreckage of a 
spacecraft. It was terribly burnt and mangled, and, now that he had 
caught up with some of the Galactic history he had missed through 
his failed attempts to have sex with the girl in the cybercubicle next to 
him at school, he was able to put in an intelligent guess that this was 
the wrecked spaceship which had drifted through the Dust Cloud all 
those billions of years ago and started the whole business off. 
But, and this is where he had become confused, there was 
something not at all right about it. 
It was genuinely wrecked. It was genuinely burnt, but a fairly brief 
inspection by an experienced eye revealed that it was not a genuine 
spacecraft. It was as if it was a full`scale model of one ʹ a solid 
blueprint. In other words it was a very useful thing to have around if 
you suddenly decided to build a spaceship yourself and didn't know 
how to do it. It was not, however, anything that would ever fly 
anywhere itself. 
He was still puzzling over this ʹ in fact he'd only just started to 
puzzle over it ʹ when he became aware that a door had slid open in 
another part of the chamber, and another couple of Krikkit robots had 
entered, looking a little glum. 
Zaphod did not want to tangle with them and, deciding that just as 
discretion was the better part of valour so was cowardice the better 
part of discretion, he valiantly hid himself in a cupboard. 
The cupboard in fact turned out to be the top part of a shaft which 
led down through an inspection hatch into a wide ventilation tunnel. 
He led himself down into it and started to crawl along it, which is 
where we found him. 
He didn't like it. It was cold, dark and profoundly uncomfortable, 
and it frightened him. At the first opportunity ʹ which was another 
shaft a hundred yards further along ʹ he climbed back up out of it. 
This time he emerged into a smaller chamber, which appeared to 
be a computer intelligence centre. He emerged in a dark narrow 
space between a large computer bank and the wall. 
He quickly learned that he was not alone in the chamber and 
started to leave again, when he began to listen with interest to what 
the other occupants were saying. 
"It's the robots, sir," said one voice. "There's something wrong with 
them." 
"What, exactly?" 
These were the voices of two War Command Krikkiters. All the War 
Commanders lived up in the sky in the Robot War Zones, and were 
largely immune to the whimsical doubts and uncertainties which were 
afflicting their fellows down on the surface of the planet. 
"Well, sir I think it's just as well that they are being phased out of 
the war effort, and that we are now going to detonate the supernova 
bomb. In the very short time since we were released from the 
envelope ʹ " 
"Get to the point." 
"The robots aren't enjoying it, sir." 
"What?" 
"The war, sir, it seems to be getting them down. There's a certain 
world`weariness about them, or perhaps I should say Universe`
weariness." 
"Well, that's all right, they're meant to be helping to destroy it." 
"Yes, well they're finding it difficult, sir. They are afflicted with a 
certain lassitude. They're just finding it hard to get behind the job. 
They lack oomph." 
"What are you trying to say?" 
"Well, I think they're very depressed about something, sir." 
"What on Krikkit are you talking about?" 
"Well, in the few skirmishes they've had recently, it seems that 
they go into battle, raise their weapons to fire and suddenly think, 
why bother? What, cosmically speaking, is it all about? And they just 
seem to get a little tired and a little grim." 
"And then what do they do?" 
"Er, quadratic equations mostly, sir. Fiendishly difficult ones by all 
accounts. And then they sulk." 
"Sulk?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"Whoever heard of a robot sulking?" 
"I don't know, sir." 
"What was that noise?" 
It was the noise of Zaphod leaving with his head spinning. 
Chapter 31
In a deep well of darkness a crippled robot sat. It had been silent in 
its metallic darkness for some time. It was cold and damp, but being a 
robot it was supposed not to be able to notice these things. With an 
enormous effort of will, however, it did manage to notice them. 
Its brain had been harnessed to the central intelligence core of the 
Krikkit War Computer. It wasn't enjoying the experience, and neither 
was the central intelligence core of the Krikkit War Computer. 
The Krikkit robots which had salvaged this pathetic metal creature 
from the swamps of Squornshellous Zeta had recognized almost 
immediately its gigantic intelligence, and the use which this could be 
to them. 
They hadn't reckoned with the attendant personality disorders, 
which the coldness, the darkness, the dampness, the crampedness 
and the loneliness were doing nothing to decrease. 
It was not happy with its task. 
Apart from anything else, the mere coordination of an entire 
planet's military strategy was taking up only a tiny part of its 
formidable mind, and the rest of it had become extremely bored. 
Having solved all the major mathematical, physical, chemical, 
biological, sociological, philosophical, etymological, meteorological 
and psychological problems of the Universe except his own, three 
times over, he was severely stuck for something to do, and had taken 
up composing short dolorous ditties of no tone, or indeed tune. The 
latest one was a lullaby. 
Marvin droned, 
Now the world has gone to bed, 
Darkness won't engulf my head, 
I can see by infra`red, 
How I hate the night. 
He paused to gather the artistic and emotional strength to tackle 
the next verse. 
Now I lay me down to sleep, 
Try to count electric sheep, 
Sweet dream wishes you can keep, 
How I hate the night. 
"Marvin " hissed a voice. 
His head snapped up, almost dislodging the intricate network of 
electrodes which connected him to the central Krikkit War Computer. 
An inspection hatch had opened and one of a pair of unruly heads 
was peering through whilst the other kept on jogging it by continually 
darting to look this way and that extremely nervously. 
"Oh, it's you," muttered the robot. "I might have known." 
"Hey, kid," said Zaphod in astonishment, "was that you singing just 
then?" 
"I am," Marvin acknowledged bitterly, "in particularly scintillating 
form at the moment." 
Zaphod poked his head in through the hatchway and looked 
around. 
"Are you alone?" he said. 
"Yes," said Marvin. "Wearily I sit here, pain and misery my only 
companions. And vast intelligence of course. And infinite sorrow. 
And..." 
"Yeah," said Zaphod. "Hey, what's your connection with all this?" 
"This," said Marvin, indicating with his less damaged arm all the 
electrodes which connected him with the Krikkit computer. 
"Then," said Zaphod awkwardly, "I guess you must have saved my 
life. Twice." 
"Three times," said Marvin. 
Zaphod's head snapped round (his other one was looking hawkishly 
in entirely the wrong direction) just in time to see the lethal killer 
robot directly behind him seize up and start to smoke. It staggered 
backwards and slumped against a wall. It slid down it. It slipped 
sideways, threw its head back and started to sob inconsolably. 
Zaphod looked back at Marvin. 
"You must have a terrific outlook on life," he said. 
"Just don't even ask," said Marvin. 
"I won't," said Zaphod, and didn't. "Hey look," he added, "you're 
doing a terrific job." 
"Which means, I suppose," said Marvin, requiring only one ten 
thousand million billion trillion grillionth part of his mental powers to 
make this particular logical leap, "that you're not going to release me 
or anything like that." 
"Kid, you know I'd love to." 
"But you're not going to." 
"No." 
"I see." 
"You're working well." 
"Yes," said Marvin. "Why stop now just when I'm hating it?" 
"I got to find Trillian and the guys. Hey, you any idea where they 
are? I mean, I just got a planet to choose from. Could take a while." 
"They are very close," said Marvin dolefully. "You can monitor 
them from here if you like." 
"I better go get them," asserted Zaphod. "Er, maybe they need 
some help, right?" 
"Maybe," said Marvin with unexpected authority in his lugubrious 
voice, "it would be better if you monitored them from here. That 
young girl," he added unexpectedly, "is one of the least benightedly 
unintelligent life forms it has been my profound lack of pleasure not 
to be able to avoid meeting." 
Zaphod took a moment or two to find his way through this 
labyrinthine string of negatives and emerged at the other end with 
surprise. 
"Trillian?" he said. "She's just a kid. Cute, yeah, but temperamental. 
You know how it is with women. Or perhaps you don't. I assume you 
don't. If you do I don't want to hear about it. Plug us in." 
"... totally manipulated." 
"What?" said Zaphod. 
It was Trillian speaking. He turned round. 
The wall against which the Krikkit robot was sobbing had lit up to 
reveal a scene taking place in some other unknown part of the Krikkit 
Robot War zones. It seemed to be a council chamber of some kind ʹ
Zaphod couldn't make it out too clearly because of the robot slumped 
against the screen. 
He tried to move the robot, but it was heavy with its grief and tried 
to bite him, so he just looked around as best he could. 
"Just think about it," said Trillian's voice, "your history is just a 
series of freakishly improbable events. And I know an improbable 
event when I see one. Your complete isolation from the Galaxy was 
freakish for a start. Right out on the very edge with a Dust Cloud 
around you. It's a set`up. Obviously." 
Zaphod was mad with frustration because he couldn't see the 
screen. The robot's head was obscuring his view of the people Trillian 
as talking to, his multi`functional battleclub was obscuring the 
background, and the elbow of the arm it had pressed tragically 
against its brow was obscuring Trillian herself. 
"Then," said Trillian, "this spaceship that crash`landed on your 
planet. That's really likely, isn't it? Have you any idea of what the odds 
are against a drifting spaceship accidentally intersecting with the orbit 
of a planet?" 
"Hey," said Zaphod, "she doesn't know what the zark she's talking 
about. I've seen that spaceship. It's a fake. No deal." 
"I thought it might be," said Marvin from his prison behind Zaphod. 
"Oh yeah," said Zaphod. "It's easy for you to say that. I just told you. 
Anyway, I don't see what it's got to do with anything." 
"And especially," continued Trillian, "the odds against it 
intersecting with the orbit of the one planet in the Galaxy, or the 
whole of the Universe as far as I know, that would be totally 
traumatized to see it. You don't know what the odds are? Nor do I, 
they're that big. Again, it's a set`up. I wouldn't be surprised if that 
spaceship was just a fake." 
Zaphod managed to move the robot's battleclub. Behind it on the 
screen were the figures of Ford, Arthur and Slartibartfast who 
appeared astonished and bewildered by the whole thing. 
"Hey, look," said Zaphod excitedly. "The guys are doing great. Ra ra 
ra  Go get 'em, guys." 
"And what about," said Trillian, "all this technology you suddenly 
managed to build for yourselves almost overnight? Most people 
would take thousands of years to do all that. Someone was feeding 
you what you needed to know, someone was keeping you at it. 
"I know, I know," she added in response to an unseen interruption, 
"I know you didn't realize it was going on. This is exactly my point. You 
never realized anything at all. Like this Supernova Bomb." 
"How do you know about that?" said an unseen voice. 
"I just know," said Trillian. "You expect me to believe that you are 
bright enough to invent something that brilliant and be too dumb to 
realize it would take you with it as well? That's not just stupid, that is 
spectacularly obtuse." 
"Hey, what's this bomb thing?" said Zaphod in alarm to Marvin. 
"The supernova bomb?" said Marvin. "It's a very, very small bomb." 
"Yeah?" 
"That would destroy the Universe in toto," added Marvin. "Good 
idea, if you ask me. They won't get it to work, though." 
"Why not, if it's so brilliant?" 
"It's brilliant," said Marvin, "they're not. They got as far as 
designing it before they were locked in the envelope. They've spent 
the last five years building it. They think they've got it right but they 
haven't. They're as stupid as any other organic life form. I hate them." 
Trillian was continuing. 
Zaphod tried to pull the Krikkit robot away by its leg, but it kicked 
and growled at him, and then quaked with a fresh outburst of sobbing. 
Then suddenly it slumped over and continued to express its feelings 
out of everybody's way on the floor. 
Trillian was standing alone in the middle of the chamber tired out 
but with fiercely burning eyes. 
Ranged in front of her were the pale`faced and wrinkled Elder 
Masters of Krikkit, motionless behind their widely curved control desk, 
staring at her with helpless fear and hatred. 
In front of them, equidistant between their control desk and the 
middle of the chamber, where Trillian stood, as if on trial, was a slim 
white pillar about four feet tall. On top of it stood a small white globe, 
about three, maybe four inches in diameter. 
Beside it stood a Krikkit robot with its multi`functional battleclub. 
"In fact," explained Trillian, "you are so dumb stupid" (She was 
sweating. Zaphod felt that this was an unattractive thing for her to be 
doing at this point) "you are all so dumb stupid that I doubt, I very 
much doubt, that you've been able to build the bomb properly 
without any help from Hactar for the last five years." 
"Who's this guy Hactar?" said Zaphod, squaring his shoulders. 
If Marvin replied, Zaphod didn't hear him. All his attention was 
concentrated on the screen. 
One of the Elders of Krikkit made a small motion with his hand 
towards the Krikkit robot. The robot raised his club. 
"There's nothing I can do," said Marvin. "It's on an independent 
circuit from the others." 
"Wait," said Trillian. 
The Elder made a small motion. The robot halted. Trillian suddenly 
seemed very doubtful of her own judgment. 
"How do you know all this?" said Zaphod to Marvin at this point. 
"Computer records," said Marvin. "I have access." 
"You're very different, aren't you," said Trillian to the Elder Masters, 
"from your fellow worldlings down on the ground. You've spent all 
your lives up here, unprotected by the atmosphere. You've been very 
vulnerable. The rest of your race is very frightened, you know, they 
don't want you to do this. You're out of touch, why don't you check 
up?" 
The Krikkit Elder grew impatient. He made a gesture to the robot 
which was precisely the opposite of the gesture he had last made to it. 
The robot swung its battleclub. It hit the small white globe. 
The small white globe was the supernova bomb. 
It was a very, very small bomb which was designed to bring the 
entire Universe to an end. 
The supernova bomb flew through the air. It hit the back wall of 
the council chamber and dented it very badly. 
"So how does she know all this?" said Zaphod. 
Marvin kept a sullen silence. 
"Probably just bluffing," said Zaphod. "Poor kid, I should never have 
left her alone." 
Chapter 32
"Hactar " called Trillian. "What are you up to?" 
There was no reply from the enclosing darkness. Trillian waited, 
nervously. She was sure that she couldn't be wrong. She peered into 
the gloom from which she had been expecting some kind of response. 
But there was only cold silence. 
"Hactar?" she called again. "I would like you to meet my friend 
Arthur Dent. I wanted to go off with a Thunder God, but he wouldn't 
let me and I appreciate that. He made me realize where my affections 
really lay. Unfortunately Zaphod is too frightened by all this, so I 
brought Arthur instead. I'm not sure why I'm telling you all this. 
"Hello?" she said again. "Hactar?" 
And then it came. 
It was thin and feeble, like a voice carried on the wind from a great 
distance, half heard, a memory of a dream of a voice. 
"Won't you both come out," said the voice. "I promise that you will 
be perfectly safe." 
They glanced at each other, and then stepped out, improbably, 
along the shaft of light which streamed out of the open hatchway of 
the Heart of Gold into the dim granular darkness of the Dust Cloud. 
Arthur tried to hold her hand to steady and reassure her, but she 
wouldn't let him. He held on to his airline hold`all with its tin of Greek 
olive oil, its towel, its crumpled postcards of Santorini and its other 
odds and ends. He steadied and reassured that instead. 
They were standing on, and in, nothing. 
Murky, dusty nothing. Each grain of dust of the pulverized 
computer sparkled dimly as it turned and twisted slowly, catching the 
sunlight in the darkness. Each particle of the computer, each speck of 
dust, held within itself, faintly and weakly, the pattern of the whole. 
In reducing the computer to dust the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax 
had merely crippled the computer, not killed it. A weak and 
insubstantial field held the particles in slight relationships with each 
other. 
Arthur and Trillian stood, or rather floated, in the middle of this 
bizarre entity. They had nothing to breathe, but for the moment this 
seemed not to matter. Hactar kept his promise. They were safe. For 
the moment. 
"I have nothing to offer you by way of hospitality," said Hactar 
faintly, "but tricks of the light. It is possible to be comfortable with 
tricks of the light, though, if that is all you have." 
His voice evanesced, and in the dark dust a long velvet paisley`
covered sofa coalesced into hazy shape. 
Arthur could hardly bear the fact that it was the same sofa which 
had appeared to him in the fields of prehistoric Earth. He wanted to 
shout and shake with rage that the Universe kept doing these insanely 
bewildering things to him. 
He let this feeling subside, and then sat on the sofa ʹ carefully. 
Trillian sat on it too. 
It was real. 
At least, if it wasn't real, it did support them, and as that is what 
sofas are supposed to do, this, by any test that mattered, was a real 
sofa. 
The voice on the solar wind breathed to them again. 
"I hope you are comfortable," it said. 
They nodded. 
"And I would like to congratulate you on the accuracy of your 
deductions." 
Arthur quickly pointed out that he hadn't deduced anything much 
himself, Trillian was the one. She had simply asked him along because 
he was interested in life, the Universe, and everything. 
"That is something in which I too am interested," breathed Hactar. 
"Well," said Arthur, "we should have a chat about it sometime. 
Over a cup of tea." 
There slowly materialized in front of them a small wooden table on 
which sat a silver teapot, a bone china milk jug, a bone china sugar 
bowl, and two bone china cups and saucers. 
Arthur reached forward, but they were just a trick of the light. He 
leaned back on the sofa, which was an illusion his body was prepared 
to accept as comfortable. 
"Why," said Trillian, "do you feel you have to destroy the 
Universe?" 
She found it a little difficult talking into nothingness, with nothing 
on which to focus. Hactar obviously noticed this. He chuckled a 
ghostly chuckle. 
"If it's going to be that sort of session," he said, "we may as well 
have the right sort of setting." 
And now there materialized in front of them something new. It was 
the dim hazy image of a couch ʹ a psychiatrist's couch. The leather 
with which it was upholstered was shiny and sumptuous, but again, it 
was only a trick of the light. 
Around them, to complete the setting, was the hazy suggestion of 
wood`panelled walls. And then, on the couch, appeared the image of 
Hactar himself, and it was an eye`twisting image. 
The couch looked normal size for a psychiatrist's couch ʹ about five 
or six feet long. 
The computer looked normal size for a black space`borne 
computer satellite ʹ about a thousand miles across. 
The illusion that the one was sitting on top of the other was the 
thing which made the eyes twist. 
"All right," said Trillian firmly. She stood up off the sofa. She felt 
that she was being asked to feel too comfortable and to accept too 
many illusions. 
"Very good," she said. "Can you construct real things too? I mean 
solid objects?" 
Again there was a pause before the answer, as if the pulverized 
mind of Hactar had to collect its thoughts from the millions and 
millions of miles over which it was scattered. 
"Ah," he sighed. "You are thinking of the spaceship." 
Thoughts seemed to drift by them and through them, like waves 
through the ether. 
"Yes," he acknowledge, "I can. 
"But it takes enormous effort and time. All I can do in my... particle 
state, you see, is encourage and suggest. Encourage and suggest. And 
suggest..." 
The image of Hactar on the couch seemed to billow and waver, as if 
finding it hard to maintain itself. 
It gathered new strength. 
"I can encourage and suggest," it said, "tiny pieces of space debris ʹ
the odd minute meteor, a few molecules here, a few hydrogen atoms 
there ʹ to move together. I encourage them together. I can tease 
them into shape, but it takes many aeons." 
"So, did you make," asked Trillian again, "the model of the wrecked 
spacecraft?" 
"Er... yes," murmured Hactar. "I have made... a few things. I can 
move them about. I made the spacecraft. It seemed best to do." 
Something then made Arthur pick up his hold`all from where he 
had left it on the sofa and grasp it tightly. 
The mist of Hactar's ancient shattered mind swirled about them as 
if uneasy dreams were moving through it. 
"I repented, you see," he murmured dolefully. "I repented of 
sabotaging my own design for the Silastic Armorfiends. It was not my 
place to make such decisions. I was created to fulfill a function and I 
failed in it. I negated my own existence." 
Hactar sighed, and they waited in silence for him to continue his 
story. 
"You were right," he said at length. "I deliberately nurtured the 
planet of Krikkit till they would arrive at the same state of mind as the 
Silastic Armorfiends, and require of me the design of the bomb I failed 
to make the first time. I wrapped myself around the planet and 
coddled it. Under the influence of events I was able to generate, they 
learned to hate like maniacs. I had to make them live in the sky. On 
the ground my influences were too weak. 
"Without me, of course, when they were locked away from me in 
the envelope of Slo`Time, their responses became very confused and 
they were unable to manage. 
"Ah well, ah well," he added, "I was only trying to fulfill my 
function." 
And very gradually, very, very slowly, the images in the cloud began 
to fade, gently to melt away. 
And then, suddenly, they stopped fading. 
"There was also the matter of revenge, of course," said Hactar, 
with a sharpness which was new in his voice. 
"Remember," he said, "that I was pulverized, and then left in a 
crippled and semi`impotent state for billions of years. I honestly 
would rather wipe out the Universe. You would feel the same way, 
believe me." 
He paused again, as eddies swept through the Dust. 
"But primarily," he said in his former, wistful tone, "I was trying to 
fulfill my function. Ah well." 
Trillian said, "Does it worry you that you have failed?" 
"Have I failed?" whispered Hactar. The image of the computer on 
the psychiatrist's couch began slowly to fade again. 
"Ah well, ah well," the fading voice intoned again. "No, failure 
doesn't bother me now." 
"You know what we have to do?" said Trillian, her voice cold and 
businesslike. 
"Yes," said Hactar, "you're going to disperse me. You are going to 
destroy my consciousness. Please be my guest ʹ after all these aeons, 
oblivion is all I crave. If I haven't already fulfilled my function, then it's 
too late now. Thank you and good night." 
The sofa vanished. 
The tea table vanished. 
The couch and the computer vanished. the walls were gone. Arthur 
and Trillian made their curious way back into the Heart of Gold. 
"Well, that," said Arthur, "would appear to be that." 
The flames danced higher in front of him and then subsided. A few 
last licks and they were gone, leaving him with just a pile of Ashes, 
where a few minutes previously there had been the Wooden Pillar of 
Nature and Spirituality. 
He scooped them off the hob of the Heart of Gold's Gamma 
barbecue, put them in a paper bag, and walked back into the bridge. 
"I think we should take them back," he said. "I feel that very 
strongly." 
He had already had an argument with Slartibartfast on this matter, 
and eventually the old man had got annoyed and left. He had 
returned to his own ship the Bistromath, had a furious row with the 
waiter and disappeared off into an entirely subjective idea of what 
space was. 
The argument had arisen because Arthur's idea of returning the 
Ashes to Lord's Cricket Ground at the same moment that they were 
originally taken would involve travelling back in time a day or so, and 
this was precisely the sort of gratuitous and irresponsible mucking 
about that the Campaign for Real Time was trying to put a stop to. 
"Yes," Arthur had said, "but you try and explain that to the MCC," 
and he would hear no more against the idea. 
"I think," he said again, and stopped. The reason he started to say it 
again was because no one had listened to him the first time, and the 
reason he stopped was because it looked fairly clear that no one was 
going to listen to him this time either. 
Ford, Zaphod and Trillian were watching the visiscreens intently as 
Hactar was dispersing under pressure from a vibration field which the 
Heart of Gold was pumping into it. 
"What did it say?" asked Ford. 
"I thought I heard it say," said Trillian in a puzzle voice, "'What's 
done is done... I have fulfilled my function...'" 
"I think we should take these back," said Arthur holding up the bag 
containing the Ashes. "I feel that very strongly." 
Chapter 33
The sun was shining calmly on a scene of complete havoc. 
Smoke was still billowing across the burnt grass in the wake of the 
theft of the Ashes by the Krikkit robots. Through the smoke, people 
were running panicstricken, colliding with each other, tripping over 
stretchers, being arrested. 
One policeman was attempting to arrest Wowbagger the Infinitely 
Prolonged for insulting behaviour, but was unable to prevent the tall 
grey`green alien from returning to his ship and arrogantly flying away, 
thus causing even more panic and pandemonium. 
In the middle of this, for the second time that afternoon, the 
figures of Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect suddenly materialized, they 
had teleported down out of the Heart of Gold which was now in 
parking orbit round the planet. 
"I can explain," shouted Arthur. "I have the Ashes  They're in this 
bag." 
"I don't think you have their attention," said Ford. 
"I have also helped save the Universe," called Arthur to anyone 
who was prepared to listen, in other words no one. 
"That should have been a crowd`stopper," said Arthur to Ford. 
"It wasn't," said Ford. 
Arthur accosted a policeman who was running past. 
"Excuse me," he said. "The Ashes. I've got them. They were stolen 
by those white robots a moment ago. I've got them in this bag. They 
were part of the Key to the Slo`Time envelope, you see, and, well, 
anyway you can guess the rest, the point is I've got them and what 
should I do with them?" 
The policeman told him, but Arthur could only assume that he was 
speaking metaphorically. 
He wandered about disconsolately. 
"Is no one interested?" he shouted out. A man rushed past him and 
jogged his elbow, he dropped the paper bag and it spilt its contents all 
over the ground. Arthur stared down at it with a tight`set mouth. 
Ford looked at him. 
"Wanna go now?" he said. 
Arthur heaved a heavy sigh. He looked around at the planet Earth, 
for what he was now certain would be the last time. 
"OK," he said. 
At that moment, through the clearing smoke, he caught sight of 
one of the wickets, still standing in spite of everything. 
"Hold on a moment," he said to Ford. "When I was a boy..." 
"Can you tell me later?" 
"I had a passion for cricket, you know, but I wasn't very good at it." 
"Or not at all, if you prefer." 
"And I always dreamed, rather stupidly, that one day I would bowl 
at Lord's." 
He looked around him at the panicstricken throng. No one was 
going to mind very much. 
"OK," said Ford wearily. "Get it over with. I shall be over there," he 
added, "being bored." He went and sat down on a patch of smoking 
grass. 
Arthur remembered that on their first visit there that afternoon, 
the cricket ball had actually landed in his bag, and he looked through 
the bag. 
He had already found the ball in it before he remembered that it 
wasn't the same bag that he'd had at the time. Still, there the ball was 
amongst his souvenirs of Greece. 
He took it out and polished it against his hip, spat on it and 
polished it again. He put the bag down. He was going to do this 
properly. 
He tossed the small hard red ball from hand to hand, feeling its 
weight. 
With a wonderful feeling of lightness and unconcern, he trotted off 
away from the wicket. A medium`fast pace, he decided, and
measured a good long run`up. 
He looked up into the sky. The birds were wheeling about it, a few 
white clouds scudded across it. The air was disturbed with the sounds 
of police and ambulance sirens, and people screaming and yelling, but 
he felt curiously happy and untouched by it all. He was going to bowl 
a ball at Lord's. 
He turned and pawed a couple of times at the ground with his 
bedroom slippers. He squared his shoulders, tossed the ball in the air 
and caught it again. 
He started to run. 
As he ran, he saw that standing at the wicket was a batsman. 
Oh, good, he thought, that should add a little... 
Then, as his running feet took him nearer, he saw more clearly. The 
batsman standing ready at the wicket was not one of the England 
cricket team. He was not one of the Australian cricket team. It was 
one of the robot Krikkit team. It was a cold, hard, lethal white killer`
robot that presumably had not returned to its ship with the others. 
Quite a few thoughts collided in Arthur Dent's mind at tis moment, 
but he didn't seem to be able to stop running. Time seemed to be 
going terribly, terribly slowly, but still he didn't seem to be able to 
stop running. 
Moving as if through syrup, he slowly turned his troubled head and 
looked at his own hand, the hand which was holding the small hard 
red ball. 
His feet were pounding slowly onwards, unstoppably, as he stared 
at the ball gripped in his helpless hand. It was emitting a deep red 
glow and flashing intermittently. And still his feet were pounding 
inexorably forward. 
He looked at the Krikkit robot again standing implacably still and 
purposefully in front of him, battleclub raised in readiness. Its eyes 
were burning with a deep cold fascinating light, and Arthur could not 
move his own eyes from them. He seemed to be looking down a 
tunnel at them ʹ nothing on either side seemed to exist. 
Some of the thoughts which were colliding in his mind at this time 
were these: 
He felt a hell of a fool. 
He felt that he should have listened rather more carefully to a 
number of things he had heard said, phrases which now pounded 
round in his mind as his feet pounded onwards to the point where he 
would inevitably release the ball to the Krikkit robot, who would 
inevitably strike it. 
He remembered Hactar saying, "Have I failed? Failure doesn't 
bother me." 
He remembered the account of Hactar's dying words, "What's 
done is done, I have fulfilled my function." 
He remembered Hactar saying that he had managed to make "a 
few things." 
He remembered the sudden movement in his hold`all that had 
made him grip it tightly to himself when he was in the Dust Cloud. 
He remembered that he had travelled back in time a couple of days 
to come to Lord's again. 
He also remembered that he wasn't a very good bowler. 
He felt his arm coming round, gripping tightly on to the ball which 
he now knew for certain was the supernova bomb that Hactar had 
built himself and planted on him, the bomb which would cause the 
Universe to come to an abrupt and premature end. 
He hoped and prayed that there wasn't an afterlife. Then he 
realized there was a contradiction involved here and merely hoped 
that there wasn't an afterlife. 
He would feel very, very embarrassed meeting everybody. 
He hoped, he hoped, he hoped that his bowling was as bad as he 
remembered it to be, because that seemed to be the only thing now 
standing between this moment and universal oblivion. 
He felt his legs pounding, he felt his arm coming round, he felt his 
feet connecting with the airline hold`all he'd stupidly left lying on the 
ground in front of him, he felt himself falling heavily forward but, 
having his mind so terribly full of other things at this moment, he 
completely forgot about hitting the ground and didn't. 
Still holding the ball firmly in his right hand he soared up into the 
air whimpering with surprise. 
He wheeled and whirled through the air, spinning out of control. 
He twisted down towards the ground, flinging himself hectically 
through the air, at the same time hurling the bomb harmlessly off into 
the distance. 
He hurtled towards the astounded robot from behind. It still had its 
multi`functional battleclub raised, but had suddenly been deprived of 
anything to hit. 
With a sudden mad access of strength, he wrestled the battleclub 
from the grip of the startled robot, executed a dazzling banking turn 
in the air, hurtled back down in a furious power`drive and with one 
crazy swing knocked the robot's head from the robot's shoulders. 
"Are you coming now?" said Ford. 
Chapter 34
And at the end they travelled again. 
There was a time when Arthur Dent would not. He said that the 
Bistromathic Drive had revealed to him that time and distance were 
one, that mind and Universe were one, that perception and reality 
were one, and that the more one travelled the more one stayed in 
one place, and that what with one thing and another he would rather 
just stay put for a while and sort it all out in his mind, which was now 
at one with the Universe so it shouldn't take too long, and he could 
get a good rest afterwards, put in a little flying practice and learn to 
cook which he had always meant to do. The can of Greek olive oil was 
now his most prized possession, and he said that the way it had 
unexpectedly turned up in his life had again given him a certain sense 
of the oneness of things which made him feel that... 
He yawned and fell asleep. 
In the morning as they prepared to take him to some quiet and 
idyllic planet where they wouldn't mind him talking like that they 
suddenly picked up a computer`driven distress call and diverted to 
investigate. 
A small but apparently undamaged spacecraft of the Merida class 
seemed to be dancing a strange little jig through the void. A brief 
computer scan revealed that the ship was fine, its computer was fine, 
but that its pilot was mad. 
"Half`mad, half`mad," the man insisted as they carried him, raving, 
aboard. 
He was a journalist with the Siderial Daily Mentioner. They sedated 
him and sent Marvin in to keep him company until he promised to try 
and talk sense. 
"I was covering a trial," he said at last, "on Argabuthon." 
He pushed himself up on to his thin wasted shoulders, his eyes 
stared wildly. His white hair seemed to be waving at someone it knew 
in the next room. 
"Easy, easy," said Ford. Trillian put a soothing hand on his shoulder. 
The man sank back down again and stared at the ceiling of the 
ship's sick bay. 
"The case," he said, "is now immaterial, but there was a witness... a 
witness... a man called... called Prak. A strange and difficult man. They 
were eventually forced to administer a drug to make him tell the truth, 
a truth drug." 
His eyes rolled helplessly in his head. 
"They gave him too much," he said in a tiny whimper. "They gave 
him much too much." He started to cry. "I thing the robots must have 
jogged the surgeon's arm." 
"Robots?" said Zaphod sharply. "What robots?" 
"Some white robots," whispered the man hoarsely, "broke into the 
courtroom and stole the judge's sceptre, the Argabuthon Sceptre of 
Justice, nasty Perspex thing. I don't know why they wanted it." He 
began to cry again. "And I think they jogged the surgeon's arm..." 
He shook his head loosely from side to side, helplessly, sadly, his 
eyes screwed up in pain. 
"And when the trial continued," he said in a weeping whisper, 
"they asked Prak a most unfortunate thing. They asked him," he 
paused and shivered, "to tell the Truth, the Whole Truth and Nothing 
but the Truth. Only, don't you see?" 
He suddenly hoisted himself up on to his elbows again and shouted 
at them. 
"They'd given him much too much of the drug " 
He collapsed again, moaning quietly. "Much too much too much 
too much too..." 
The group gathered round his bedside glanced at each other. There 
were goose pimples on backs. 
"What happened?" said Zaphod at last. 
"Oh, he told it all right," said the man savagely, "for all I know he's 
still telling it now. Strange, terrible things... terrible, terrible " he 
screamed. 
They tried to calm him, but he struggled to his elbows again. 
"Terrible things, incomprehensible things," he shouted, "things that 
would drive a man mad " 
He stared wildly at them. 
"Or in my case," he said, "half`mad. I'm a journalist." 
"You mean," said Arthur quietly, "that you are used to confronting 
the truth?" 
"No," said the man with a puzzled frown. "I mean that I made an 
excuse and left early." 
He collapsed into a coma from which he recovered only once and 
briefly. 
On that one occasion, they discovered from him the following: 
When it became clear that Prak could not be stopped, that here 
was truth in its absolute and final form, the court was cleared. 
Not only cleared, it was sealed up, with Prak still in it. Steel walls 
were erected around it, and, just to be on the safe side, barbed wire, 
electric fences, crocodile swamps and three major armies were 
installed, so that no one would ever have to hear Prak speak. 
"That's a pity," said Arthur. "I'd like to hear what he had to say. 
Presumably he would know what the Ultimate Question to the 
Ultimate Answer is. It's always bothered me that we never found 
out." 
"Think of a number," said the computer, " any number." 
Arthur told the computer the telephone number of King's Cross 
railway station passenger inquiries, on the grounds that it must have 
some function, and this might turn out to be it. 
The computer injected the number into the ship's reconstituted 
Improbability Drive. 
In Relativity, Matter tells Space how to curve, and Space tells 
Matter how to move. 
The Heart of Gold told space to get knotted, and parked itself 
neatly within the inner steel perimeter of the Argabuthon Chamber of 
Law. 
The courtroom was an austere place, a large dark chamber, clearly 
designed for Justice rather than, for instance, for Pleasure. You 
wouldn't hold a dinner party here ʹ at least, not a successful one. The
decor would get your guests down. 
The ceilings were high, vaulted and very dark. Shadows lurked 
there with grim determination. The panelling for the walls and 
benches, the cladding of the heavy pillars, all were carved from the 
darkest and most severe trees in the fearsome Forest of Arglebard. 
The massive black Podium of Justice which dominated the centre of 
the chamber was a monster of gravity. If a sunbeam had ever 
managed to slink this far into the Justice complex of Argabuthon it 
would have turned around and slunk straight back out again. 
Arthur and Trillian were the first in, whilst Ford and Zaphod bravely 
kept a watch on their rear. 
At first it seemed totally dark and deserted. Their footsteps echoed 
hollowly round the chamber. This seemed curious. All the defences 
were still in position and operative around the outside of the building, 
they had run scan checks. Therefore, they had assumed, the truth`
telling must still be going on. 
But there was nothing. 
Then, as their eyes became accustomed to the darkness, they 
spotted a dull red glow in a corner, and behind the glow a live shadow. 
They swung a torch round on to it. 
Prak was lounging on a bench, smoking a listless cigarette. 
"Hi," he said, with a little half`wave. His voice echoed through the 
chamber. He was a little man with scraggy hair. He sat with his 
shoulders hunched forward and his head and knees kept jiggling. He 
took a drag of his cigarette. 
They stared at him. 
"What's going on?" said Trillian. 
"Nothing," said the man and jiggled his shoulders. 
Arthur shone his torch full on Prak's face. 
"We thought," he said, "that you were meant to be telling the 
Truth, the Whole Truth and Nothing but the Truth." 
"Oh, that," said Prak. "Yeah. I was. I finished. There's not nearly as 
much of it as people imagine. Some of it's pretty funny, though." 
He suddenly exploded in about three seconds of manical laughter 
and stopped again. he sat there, jiggling his head and knees. He 
dragged on his cigarette with a strange half`smile. 
Ford and Zaphod came forward out of the shadows. 
"Tell us about it," said Ford. 
"Oh, I can't remember any of it now," said Prak. "I thought of 
writing some of it down, but first I couldn't find a pencil, and then I 
thought, why bother?" 
There was a long silence, during which they thought they could feel 
the Universe age a little. Prak stared into the torchlight. 
"None of it?" said Arthur at last. "You can remember none of it?" 
"No. Except most of the good bits were about frogs, I remember 
that." 
Suddenly he was hooting with laughter again and stamping his feet 
on the ground. 
"You would not believe some of the things about frogs," he gasped. 
"Come on let's go and find ourselves a frog. Boy, will I ever see them 
in a new light " He leapt to his feet and did a tiny little dance. Then he 
stopped and took a long drag at his cigarette. 
"Let's find a frog I can laugh at," he said simply. "Anyway, who are 
you guys?" 
"We came to find you," said Trillian, deliberately not keeping the 
disappointment out of her voice. "My name is Trillian." 
Prak jiggled his head. 
"Ford Prefect," said Ford Prefect with a shrug. 
Prak jiggled his head. 
"And I," said Zaphod, when he judged that the silence was once 
again deep enough to allow an announcement of such gravity to be 
tossed in lightly, "am Zaphod Beeblebrox." 
Prak jiggled his head. 
"Who's this guy?" said Prak jiggling his shoulder at Arthur, who was 
standing silent for a moment, lost in disappointed thoughts. 
"Me?" said Arthur. "Oh, my name's Arthur Dent." 
Prak's eyes popped out of his head. 
"No kidding?" he yelped. "You are Arthur Dent? The Arthur Dent?" 
He staggered backwards, clutching his stomach and convulsed with 
fresh paroxysms o laughter. 
"Hey, just think of meeting you " he gasped. "Boy," he shouted, 
"you are the most... wow, you just leave the frogs standing " 
He howled and screamed with laughter. He fell over backwards on 
to the bench. He hollered and yelled in hysterics. He cried with 
laughter, he kicked his legs in the air, he beat his chest. Gradually he 
subsided, panting. He looked at them. He looked at Arthur. He fell 
back again howling with laughter. Eventually he fell asleep. 
Arthur stood there with his lips twitching whilst the others carried 
Prak comatose on to the ship. 
"Before we picked up Prak," said Arthur, "I was going to leave. I still 
want to, and I think I should do so as soon as possible." 
The others nodded in silence, a silence which was only slightly 
undermined by the heavily muffled and distant sound of hysterical 
laughter which came drifting from Prak's cabin at the farthest end of 
the ship. 
"We have questioned him," continued Arthur, "or at least, you 
have questioned him ʹ I, as you know, can't go near him ʹ on 
everything, and he doesn't really seem to have anything to contribute. 
Just the occasional snippet, and things I don't want to hear about 
frogs." 
The others tried not to smirk. 
"Now, I am the first to appreciate a joke," said Arthur and then had 
to wait for the others to stop laughing. 
"I am the first..." he stopped again. This time he stopped and 
listened to the silence. There actually was silence this time, and it had 
come very suddenly. 
Prak was quiet. For days they had lived with constant manical 
laughter ringing round the ship, only occasionally relieved by short 
periods of light giggling and sleep. Arthur's very soul was clenched 
with paranoia. 
This was not the silence of sleep. A buzzer sounded. A glance at a 
board told them that the buzzer had been sounded by Prak. 
"He's not well," said Trillian quietly. "The constant laughing is 
completely wrecking his body." 
Arthur's lips twitched but he said nothing. 
"We'd better go and see him," said Trillian. 
Trillian came out of the cabin wearing her serious face. 
"He wants you to go in," she said to Arthur, who was wearing his 
glum and tight`lipped one. He thrust his hands deep into his dressing`
gown pockets and tried to think of something to say which wouldn't 
sound petty. It seemed terribly unfair, but he couldn't. 
"Please," said Trillian. 
He shrugged and went in, taking his glum and tight`lipped face with 
him, despite the reaction this always provoked from Prak. 
He looked down at his tormentor, who was lying quietly on the bed, 
ashen and wasted. His breathing was very shallow. Ford and Zaphod 
were standing by the bed looking awkward. 
"You wanted to ask me something," said Prak in a thin voice and 
coughed slightly. 
Just the cough made Arthur stiffen, but it passed and subsided. 
"How do you know that?" he asked. 
Prak shrugged weakly. "'Cos it's true," he said simply. 
Arthur took the point. 
"Yes," he said at last in rather a strained drawl. "I did have a 
question. Or rather, what I actually have is an Answer. I wanted to 
know what the Question was." 
Prak nodded sympathetically, and Arthur relaxed a little. 
"It's... well, it's a long story," he said, "but the Question I would like 
to know is the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe and Everything. 
All we know is that the Answer is Forty`Two, which is a little 
aggravating." 
Prak nodded again. 
"Forty`Two," he said. "Yes, that's right." 
He paused. Shadows of thought and memory crossed his face like 
the shadows of clouds crossing the land. 
"I'm afraid," he said at last, "that the Question and the Answer are
mutually exclusive. Knowledge of one logically precludes knowledge 
of the other. It is impossible that both can ever be known about the 
same universe." 
He paused again. Disappointment crept into Arthur's face and 
snuggled down into its accustomed place. 
"Except," said Prak, struggling to sort a thought out, "if it happened, 
it seems that the Question and the Answer would just cancel each 
other out and take the Universe with them, which would then be 
replaced by something even more bizarrely inexplicable. It is possible 
that this has already happened," he added with a weak smile, "but 
there is a certain amount of Uncertainty about it." 
A little giggle brushed through him. 
Arthur sat down on a stool. 
"Oh well," he said with resignation, "I was just hoping there would 
be some sort of reason." 
"Do you know," said Prak, "the story of the Reason?" 
Arthur said that he didn't, and Prak said that he knew that he didn't. 
He told it. 
One night, he said, a spaceship appeared in the sky of a planet 
which had never seen one before. The planet was Dalforsas, the ship 
was this one. It appeared as a brilliant new star moving silently across 
the heavens. 
Primitive tribesmen who were sitting huddled on the Cold Hillsides 
looked up from their steaming night`drinks and pointed with 
trembling fingers, swearing that they had seen a sign, a sign from 
their gods which meant that they must now arise at last and go and 
slay the evil Princes of the Plains. 
In the high turrets of their palaces, the Princes of the Plains looked 
up and saw the shining star, and received it unmistakably as a sign 
from their gods that they must now go and set about the accursed 
Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides. 
And between them, the Dwellers in the Forest looked up into the 
sky and saw the sigh of the new star, and saw it with fear and 
apprehension, for though they had never seen anything like it before, 
they too knew precisely what it foreshadowed, and they bowed their 
heads in despair. 
They knew that when the rains came, it was a sign. 
When the rains departed, it was a sign. 
When the winds rose, it was a sign. 
When the winds fell, it was a sign. 
When in the land there was born at midnight of a full moon a goat 
with three heads, that was a sign. 
When in the land there was born at some time in the afternoon a 
perfectly normal cat or pig with no birth complications at all, or even 
just a child with a retrousse nose, that too would often be taken as a 
sign. 
So there was no doubt at all that a new star in the sky was a sign of 
a particularly spectacular order. 
And each new sign signified the same thing ʹ that the Princes of 
the Plains and the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides were about to beat 
the hell out of each other again. 
This in itself wouldn't be so bad, except that the Princes of the 
Plains and the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides always elected to beat 
the hell out of each other in the Forest, and it was always the 
Dwellers in the Forest who came off worst in these exchanges, though 
as far as they could see it never had anything to do with them. 
And sometimes, after some of the worst of these outrages, the 
Dwellers in the Forest would send a messenger to either the leader of 
the Princes of the Plains or the leader of the Tribesmen of the Cold 
Hillsides and demand to know the reason for this intolerable 
behaviour. 
And the leader, whichever one it was, would take the messenger 
aside and explain the Reason to him, slowly and carefully and with 
great attention to the considerable detail involved. 
And the terrible thing was, it was a very good one. It was very clear, 
very rational, and tough. The messenger would hang his head and feel 
sad and foolish that he had not realized what a tough and complex 
place the real world was, and what difficulties and paradoxes had to 
be embraced if one was to live in it. 
"Now do you understand?" the leader would say. 
The messenger would nod dumbly. 
"And you see these battles have to take place?" 
Another dumb nod. 
"And why they have to take place in the forest, and why it is in 
everybody's best interest, the Forest Dwellers included, that they 
should?" 
"Er..." 
"In the long run." 
"Er, yes." 
And the messenger did understand the Reason, and he returned to 
his people in the Forest. But as he approached them, as he walked 
through the Forest and amongst the trees, he found that all he could 
remember of the Reason was how terribly clear the argument had 
seemed. What it actually was he couldn't remember at all. 
And this, of course, was a great comfort when next the Tribesmen 
and the Princes came hacking and burning their way through the 
Forest, killing every Forest Dweller in their way. 
Prak paused in his story and coughed pathetically. 
"I was the messenger," he said, "after the battles precipitated by 
the appearance of your ship, which were particularly savage. Many of 
our people died. I thought I could bring the Reason back. I went and 
was told it by the leader of the Princes, but on the way back it slipped 
and melted away in my mind like snow in the sun. That was many 
years ago, and much has happened since then." 
He looked up at Arthur and giggled again very gently. 
"There is one other thing I can remember from the truth drug. 
Apart from the frogs, and that is God's last message to his creation. 
Would you like to hear it?" 
For a moment they didn't know whether to take him seriously. 
"'Strue," he said. "For real. I mean it." 
His chest heaved weakly and he struggled for breath. His head 
lolled slightly. 
"I wasn't very impressed with it when I first knew what it was," he 
said, "but now I think back to how impressed I was by the Prince's 
Reason, and how soon afterwards I couldn't recall it at all, I think it 
might be a lot more helpful. Would you like to know what it is? Would 
you?" 
They nodded dumbly. 
"I bet you would. If you're that interested I suggest you go and look 
for it. It is written in thirty`foot`high letters of fire on top of the 
Quentulus Quazgar Mountains in the land of Sevorbeupstry on the 
planet Preliumtarn, third out from the sun Zarss in Galactic Sector 
QQ7 Active J Gamma. It is guarded by the Lajestic Vantrashell of Lob." 
There was a long silence following this announcement, which was 
finally broken by Arthur. 
"Sorry, it's where?" he said. 
"It is written," repeated Prak, "in thirty`foot`high letters of fire on 
top of the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains in the land of Sevorbeupstry 
on the planet Preliumtarn, third out from the..." 
"Sorry," said Arthur again, "which mountains?" 
"The Quentulus Quazgar Mountains in the land of Sevorbeupstry 
on the planet..." 
"Which land was that? I didn't quite catch it." 
"Sevorbeupstry, on the planet..." 
"Sevorbe ʹ what?" 
"Oh, for heaven's sake," said Prak and died testily. 
In the following days Arthur thought a little about this message, 
but in the end he decided that he was not going to allow himself to be 
drawn by it, and insisted on following his original plan of finding a nice 
little world somewhere to settle down and lead a quiet retired life. 
Having saved the Universe twice in one day he thought that he could 
take things a little easier from now on. 
They dropped him off on the planet Krikkit, which was now once 
again an idyllic pastoral world, even if the songs did occasionally get 
on his nerves. 
He spent a lot of time flying. 
He learnt to communicate with birds and discovered that their 
conversation was fantastically boring. It was all to do with wind speed, 
wing spans, power`to`weight ratios and a fair bit about berries. 
Unfortunately, he discovered, once you have learnt birdspeak you 
quickly come to realize that the air is full of it the whole time, just 
inane bird chatter. There is no getting away from it. 
For that reason Arthur eventually gave up the sport and learnt to 
live on the ground and love it, despite a lot of the inane chatter he 
heard down there as well. 
One day, he was walking through the fields humming a ravishing 
tune he'd heard recently when a silver spaceship descended from the 
sky and landed in front of him. 
A hatchway opened, a ramp extended, and a tall grey`green alien 
marched out and approached him. 
"Arthur Phili..." it said, then glanced sharply at him and down at his 
clipboard. He frowned. He looked up at him again. 
"I've done you before haven't I?" he said. 
DOUGLAS ADAMS 
SO LONG,(AND THANKS FOR 
ALL THE FISH 
for Jane 
with thanks 
to Rick and Heidi for the loan of their stable event 
to Mogens and Andy and all at Huntsham Court for a number of 
unstable events 
and especially to Sonny Metha for being stable through all events. 
Preface
Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of 
the western spiral arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow 
sun. 
Orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety`two million miles is an 
utterly insignificant little blue green planet whose ape`descended life 
forms are so amazingly primitive that they still think digital watches 
are a pretty neat idea. 
This planet has ʹ or rather had ʹ a problem, which was this: most 
of the people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time. Many 
solutions were suggested for this problem, but most of these were 
largely concerned with the movements of small green pieces of paper, 
which is odd because on the whole it wasn't the small green pieces of 
paper that were unhappy. 
And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and 
most of them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches. 
Many were increasingly of the opinion that they'd all made a big 
mistake in coming down from the trees in the first place. And some 
said that even the trees had been a bad move, and that no one should 
ever have left the oceans. 
And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man 
had been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice 
to people for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in 
Rickmansworth suddenly realized what it was that had been going 
wrong all this time, and she finally knew how the world could be 
made a good and happy place. This time it was right, it would work, 
and no one would have to get nailed to anything. 
Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone 
about it, a terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost 
forever. 
This is her story. 
Chapter 1
That evening it was dark early, which was normal for the time of 
year. It was cold and windy, which was normal. 
It started to rain, which was particularly normal. 
A spacecraft landed, which was not. 
There was nobody around to see it except some spectacularly 
stupid quadrupeds who hadn't the faintest idea what to make of it, or 
whether they were meant to make anything of it, or eat it, or what. 
So they did what they did to everything which was to run away from it 
and try to hide under each other, which never worked. 
It slipped down out of the clouds, seemingly balanced on a single 
beam of light. 
From a distance you would scarcely have noticed it through the 
lightning and the storm clouds, but seen from close to it was strangely 
beautiful ʹ a grey craft of elegantly sculpted form: quite small. 
Of course, one never has the slightest notion what size or shape 
different species are going to turn out to be, but if you were to take 
the findings of the latest Mid`Galactic Census report as any kind of 
accurate Guide to statistical averages you would probably guess that 
the craft would hold about six people, and you would be right. 
You'd probably guessed that anyway. The Census report, like most 
such surveys, had cost an awful lot of money and didn't tell anybody 
anything they didn't already know ʹ except that every single person in 
the Galaxy had 2.4 legs and owned a hyena. Since this was clearly not 
true the whole thing had eventually to be scrapped. 
The craft slid quietly down through the rain, its dim operating lights 
wrapping it in tasteful rainbows. It hummed very quietly, a hum which 
became gradually louder and deeper as it approached the ground, 
and which at an altitude of six inches became a heavy throb. 
At last it dropped and was quiet. 
A hatchway opened. A short flight of steps unfolded itself. 
A light appeared in the opening, a bright light streaming out into 
the wet night, and shadows moved within. 
A tall figure appeared in the light, looked around, flinched, and 
hurried down the steps, carrying a large shopping bag under its arm. 
It turned and gave a single abrupt wave back at the ship. Already 
the rain was streaming through its hair. 
"Thank you," he called out, "thank you very..." 
He was interrupted by a sharp crack of thunder. He glanced up 
apprehensively, and in response to a sudden thought quickly started 
to rummage through the large plastic shopping bag, which he now 
discovered had a hole in the bottom. 
It had large characters printed on the side which read (to anyone 
who could decipher the Centaurian alphabet) DUTY FREE MEGA`
MARKET, PORT BRASTA, ALPHA CENTAURI. BE LIKE THE TWENTY`
SECOND ELEPHANT WITH HEATED VALUE IN SPACE`BARK  
"Hold on " the figure called, waving at the ship. 
The steps, which had started to fold themselves back through the 
hatchway, stopped, re`unfolded, and allowed him back in. 
He emerged again a few seconds later carrying a battered and 
threadbare towel which he shoved into the bag. 
He waved again, hoisted the bag under his arm, and started to run 
for the shelter of some trees as, behind him, the spacecraft had 
already begun its ascent. 
Lightning flitted through the sky and made the figure pause for a 
moment, and then hurry onwards, revising his path to give the trees a 
wide berth. He moved swiftly across the ground, slipping here and 
there, hunching himself against the rain which was falling now with 
ever`increasing concentration, as if being pulled from the sky. 
His feet sloshed through the mud. Thunder grumbled over the hills. 
He pointlessly wiped the rain off his face and stumbled on. 
More lights. 
Not lightning this time, but more diffused and dimmer lights which 
played slowly over the horizon and faded. 
The figure paused again on seeing them, and then redoubled his 
steps, making directly towards the point on the horizon at which they 
had appeared.
And now the ground was becoming steeper, sloping upwards, and 
after another two or three hundred yards it led at last to an obstacle. 
The figure paused to examine the barrier and then dropped the bag 
he was carrying over it before climbing over himself. 
Hardly had the figure touched the ground on the other side when 
there came sweeping out of the rain towards him a machine, lights 
streaming through the wall of water. The figure pressed back as the 
machine streaked towards him. It was a low bulbous shape, like a 
small whale surfing ʹ sleek, grey and rounded and moving at terrifying 
speed. 
The figure instinctively threw up his hands to protect himself, but 
was hit only by a sluice of water as the machine swept past and off 
into the night. 
It was illuminated briefly by another flicker of lightning crossing the 
sky, which allowed the soaked figure by the roadside a split`second to 
read a small sign at the back of the machine before it disappeared. 
To the figure's apparent incredulous astonishment the sign read, 
"My other car is also a Porsche." 
Chapter 2
Rob McKeena was a miserable bastard and he knew it because he'd 
had a lot of people point it out to him over the years and he saw no 
reason to disagree with them except the obvious one which was that 
he liked disagreeing with people, particularly people he disliked, 
which included, at the last count, everyone. 
He heaved a sigh and shoved down a gear. 
The hill was beginning to steepen and his lorry was heavy with 
Danish thermostatic radiator controls.
It wasn't that he was naturally predisposed to be so surly, at least 
he hoped not. It was just the rain which got him down, always the 
rain. 
It was raining now, just for a change. 
It was a particular type of rain he particularly disliked, particularly 
when he was driving. He had a number for it. It was rain type 17. 
He had read somewhere that the Eskimos had over two hundred 
different words for snow, without which their conversation would 
probably have got very monotonous. So they would distinguish 
between thin snow and thick snow, light snow and heavy snow, 
sludgy snow, brittle snow, snow that came in flurries, snow that came 
in drifts, snow that came in on the bottom of your neighbour's boots 
all over your nice clean igloo floor, the snows of winter, the snows of 
spring, the snows you remember from your childhood that were so 
much better than any of your modern snow, fine snow, feathery snow, 
hill snow, valley snow, snow that falls in the morning, snow that falls 
at night, snow that falls all of a sudden just when you were going out 
fishing, and snow that despite all your efforts to train them, the 
huskies have pissed on. 
Rob McKeena had two hundred and thirty`one different types of 
rain entered in his little book, and he didn't like any of them. 
He shifted down another gear and the lorry heaved its revs up. It 
grumbled in a comfortable sort of way about all the Danish 
thermostatic radiator controls it was carrying. 
Since he had left Denmark the previous afternoon, he had been 
through types 33 (light pricking drizzle which made the roads slippery), 
39 (heavy spotting), 47 to 51 (vertical light drizzle through to sharply 
slanting light to moderate drizzle freshening), 87 and 88 (two finely 
distinguished varieties of vertical torrential downpour), 100 (post`
downpour squalling, cold), all the seastorm types between 192 and 
213 at once, 123, 124, 126, 127 (mild and intermediate cold gusting, 
regular and syncopated cab`drumming), 11 (breezy droplets), and 
now his least favourite of all, 17. 
Rain type 17 was a dirty blatter battering against his windscreen so 
hard that it didn't make much odds whether he had his wipers on or 
off. 
He tested this theory by turning them off briefly, but as it turned 
out the visibility did get quite a lot worse. It just failed to get better 
again when he turned them back on. 
In fact one of the wiper blades began to flap off. 
Swish swish swish flop swish flop swish swish flop swish flop swish 
flop flop flop scrape. 
He pounded his steering wheel, kicked the floor, thumped his 
cassette player till it suddenly started playing Barry Manilow, 
thumped it again till it stopped, and swore and swore and swore and 
swore and swore. 
It was at the very moment that his fury was peaking that there 
loomed swimmingly in his headlights, hardly visible through the 
blatter, a figure by the roadside. 
A poor bedraggled figure, strangely attired, wetter than an otter in 
a washing machine, and hitching. 
"Poor miserable sod," thought Rob McKeena to himself, realizing 
that here was somebody with a better right to feel hard done by than 
himself, "must be chilled to the bone. Stupid to be out hitching on a 
filthy night like this. All you get is cold, wet, and lorries driving 
through puddles at you." 
He shook his head grimly, heaved another sigh, gave the wheel a 
turn and hit a large sheet of water square on. 
"See what I mean?" he thought to himself as he ploughed swiftly 
through it. "You get some right bastards on the road." 
Splattered in his rear mirror a couple of seconds later was the 
reflection of the hitch`hiker, drenched by the roadside. 
For a moment he felt good about this. A moment or two later he 
felt bad about feeling good about it. Then he felt good about feeling 
bad about feeling good about it and, satisfied, drove on into the night. 
At least it made up for having been finally overtaken by that 
Porsche he had been diligently blocking for the last twenty miles. 
And as he drove on, the rainclouds dragged down the sky after him, 
for, though he did not know it, Rob McKeena was a Rain God. All he 
knew was that his working days were miserable and he had a 
succession of lousy holidays. All the clouds knew was that they loved 
him and wanted to be near him, to cherish him, and to water him. 
Chapter 3
The next two lorries were not driven by Rain Gods, but they did 
exactly the same thing. 
The figure trudged, or rather sloshed, onwards till the hill resumed 
and the treacherous sheet of water was left behind. 
After a while the rain began to ease and the moon put in a brief 
appearance from behind the clouds. 
A Renault drove by, and its driver made frantic and complex signals 
to the trudging figure to indicate that he would have been delighted 
to give the figure a lift, only he couldn't this time because he wasn't 
going in the direction that the figure wanted to go, whatever direction 
that might be, and he was sure the figure would understand. He 
concluded the signalling with a cheery thumbs`up sign, as if to say 
that he hoped the figure felt really fine about being cold and almost 
terminally wet, and he would catch him the next time around. 
The figure trudged on. A Fiat passed and did exactly the same as 
the Renault. 
A Maxi passed on the other side of the road and flashed its lights at
the slowly plodding figure, though whether this was meant to convey 
a "Hello" or a "Sorry we're going the other way" or a "Hey look, 
there's someone in the rain, what a jerk" was entirely unclear. A 
green strip across the top of the windscreen indicated that whatever 
the message was, it came from Steve and Carola. 
The storm had now definitely abated, and what thunder there was 
now grumbled over more distant hills, like a man saying "And another 
thing..." twenty minutes after admitting he's lost the argument. 
The air was clearer now, the night cold. Sound travelled rather well. 
The lost figure, shivering desperately, presently reached a junction, 
where a side road turned off to the left. Opposite the turning stood a 
signpost which the figure suddenly hurried to and studied with 
feverish curiosity, only twisting away from it as another car passed 
suddenly. 
And another. 
The first whisked by with complete disregard, the second flashed 
meaninglessly. A Ford Cortina passed and put on its brakes. 
Lurching with surprise, the figure bundled his bag to his chest and 
hurried forward towards the car, but at the last moment the Cortina 
span its wheels in the wet and carreered off up the road rather 
amusingly. 
The figure slowed to a stop and stood there, lost and dejected. 
As it chanced, the following day the driver of the Cortina went into 
hospital to have his appendix out, only due to a rather amusing mix 
up the surgeon removed his leg in error, and before the 
appendectomy could be rescheduled, the appendicitis complicated 
into an entertainingly serious case of peritonitis and justice, in its way, 
was served. 
The figure trudged on. 
A Saab drew to a halt beside him. 
Its window wound down and a friendly voice said, "Have you come 
far?" 
The figure turned toward it. He stopped and grasped the handle of 
the door. 
The figure, the car and its door handle were all on a planet called 
the Earth, a world whose entire entry in the Hitchhiker's Guide to the 
Galaxy comprised the two words "Mostly harmless". 
The man who wrote this entry was called Ford Prefect, and he was 
at this precise moment on a far from harmless world, sitting in a far 
from harmless bar, recklessly causing trouble. 
Chapter 4
Whether it was because he was drunk, ill or suicidally insane would 
not have been apparent to a casual observer, and indeed there were 
no casual observers in the Old Pink Dog Bar on the lower South Side 
of Han Dold City because it wasn't the sort of place you could afford 
to do things casually in if you wanted to stay alive. Any observers in 
the place would have been mean hawklike observers, heavily armed, 
with painful throbbings in their heads which caused them to do crazy 
things when they observed things they didn't like. 
One of those nasty hushes had descended on the place, a sort of 
missile crisis sort of hush. 
Even the evil`looking bird perched on a rod in the bar had stopped 
screeching out the names and addresses of local contract killers, 
which was a service it provided for free. 
All eyes were on Ford Prefect. Some of them were on stalks. 
The particular way in which he was choosing to dice recklessly with 
death today was by trying to pay for a drinks bill the size of a small 
defence budget with an American Express Card, which was not 
acceptable anywhere in the known Universe. 
"What are you worried about?" he asked in a cheery kind of voice. 
"The expiration date? Have you guys never heard of Neo`Relativity 
out here? There's whole new areas of physics which can take care of 
this sort of thing. Time dilation effects, temporal relastatics..." 
"We are not worried about the expiration date," said the man to 
whom he addressed these remarks, who was a dangerous barman in 
a dangerous city. His voice was a low soft purr, like the low soft purr 
made by the opening of an ICBM silo. A hand like a side of meat 
tapped on the bar top, lightly denting it. 
"Well, that's good then," said Ford, packing his satchel and 
preparing to leave. 
The tapping finger reached out and rested lightly on the shoulder 
of Ford Prefect. It prevented him from leaving. 
Although the finger was attached to a slablike hand, and the hand 
was attached to a clublike forearm, the forearm wasn't attached to 
anything at all, except in the metaphorical sense that it was attached 
by a fierce doglike loyalty to the bar which was its home. It had 
previously been more conventionally attached to the original owner 
of the bar, who on his deathbed had unexpectedly bequeathed it to 
medical science. Medical science had decided they didn't like the look 
of it and had bequeathed it right back to the Old Pink Dog Bar. 
The new barman didn't believe in the supernatural or poltergeists 
or anything kooky like that, he just knew an useful ally when he saw 
one. The hand sat on the bar. It took orders, it served drinks, it dealt 
murderously with people who behaved as if they wanted to be 
murdered. Ford Prefect sat still. 
"We are not worried about the expiration date," repeated the 
barman, satisfied that he now had Ford Prefect's full attention. "We 
are worried about the entire piece of plastic." 
"What?" said Ford. He seemed a little taken aback. 
"This," said the barman, holding out the card as if it was a small fish 
whose soul had three weeks earlier winged its way to the Land Where 
Fish are Eternally Blessed, "we don't accept it." 
Ford wondered briefly whether to raise the fact that he didn't have 
any other means of payment on him, but decided for the moment to 
soldier on. The disembodied hand was now grasping his shoulder 
lightly but firmly between its finger and thumb. 
"But you don't understand," said Ford, his expression slowly 
ripening from a little taken abackness into rank incredulity. "This is 
the American Express Card. It is the finest way of settling bills known 
to man. Haven't you read their junk mail?" 
The cheery quality of Ford's voice was beginning to grate on the 
barman's ears. It sounded like someone relentlessly playing the kazoo 
during one of the more sombre passages of a War Requiem. 
One of the bones in Ford's shoulder began to grate against another 
one of the bones in his shoulder in a way which suggested that the 
hand had learnt the principles of pain from a highly skilled 
chiropracter. He hoped he could get this business settled before the 
hand started to grate one of the bones in his shoulder against any of 
the bones in different parts of his body. Luckily, the shoulder it was 
holding was not the one he had his satchel slung over. 
The barman slid the card back across the bar at Ford. 
"We have never," he said with muted savagery, "heard of this 
thing." 
This was hardly surprising. 
Ford had only acquired it through a serious computer error 
towards the end of the fifteen years' sojourn he had spent on the 
planet Earth. Exactly how serious, the American Express Company had 
got to know very rapidly, and the increasingly strident and panic`
stricken demands of its debt collection department were only 
silenced by the unexpected demolition of the entire planet by the 
Vogons to make way for a new hyperspace bypass. 
He had kept it ever since because he found it useful to carry a form 
of currency that no one would accept. 
"Credit?" he said. "Aaaargggh..." 
These two words were usually coupled together in the Old Pink 
Dog Bar. 
"I thought," gasped Ford, "that this was meant to be a class 
establishment..." 
He glanced around at the motley collection of thugs, pimps and 
record company executives that skulked on the edges of the dim 
pools of light with which the dark shadows of the bar's inner recesses 
were pitted. They were all very deliberately looking in any direction 
but his now, carefully picking up the threads of their former 
conversations about murders, drug rings and music publishing deals. 
They knew what would happen now and didn't want to watch in case 
it put them off their drinks. 
"You gonna die, boy," the barman murmured quietly at Ford 
Prefect, and the evidence was on his side. The bar used to have one of 
those signs hanging up which said, "Please don't ask for credit as a 
punch in the mouth often offends", but in the interest of strict 
accuracy this was altered to, "Please don't ask for credit because 
having your throat torn out by a savage bird while a disembodied 
hand smashes your head against the bar often offends". However, 
this made an unreadable mess of the notice, and anyway didn't have 
the same ring to it, so it was taken down again. It was felt that the 
story would get about of its own accord, and it had. 
"Lemme look at the bill again," said Ford. He picked it up and 
studied it thoughtfully under the malevolent gaze of the barman, and 
the equally malevolent gaze of the bird, which was currently gouging 
great furrows in the bar top with its talons. 
It was a rather lengthy piece of paper. 
At the bottom of it was a number which looked like one of those 
serial numbers you find on the underside of stereo sets which always 
takes so long to copy on to the registration form. He had, after all, 
been in the bar all day, he had been drinking a lot of stuff with 
bubbles in it, and he had bought an awful lot of rounds for all the 
pimps, thugs and record executives who suddenly couldn't remember 
who he was. 
He cleared his throat rather quietly and patted his pockets. There 
was, as he knew, nothing in them. He rested his left hand lightly but 
firmly on the half`opened flap of his satchel. The disembodied hand 
renewed its pressure on his right shoulder. 
"You see," said the barman, and his face seemed to wobble evilly in 
front of Ford's, "I have a reputation to think of. You see that, don't 
you?" 
This is it, thought Ford. There was nothing else for it. He had 
obeyed the rules, he had made a bona fide attempt to pay his bill, it 
had been rejected. He was now in danger of his life. 
"Well," he said quietly, "if it's your reputation..." 
With a sudden flash of speed he opened his satchel and slapped 
down on the bar top his copy of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy 
and the official card which said that he was a field researcher for the 
Guide and absolutely not allowed to do what he was now doing. 
"Want a write`up?" 
The barman's face stopped in mid`wobble. The bird's talons 
stopped in mid`furrow. The hand slowly released its grip. 
"That," said the barman in a barely audible whisper, from between 
dry lips, "will do nicely, sir." 
Chapter 5
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a powerful organ. Indeed, 
its influence is so prodigious that strict rules have had to be drawn up 
by its editorial staff to prevent its misuse. So none of its field 
researchers are allowed to accept any kind of services, discounts or 
preferential treatment of any kind in return for editorial favours 
unless: 
a) they have made a bona fide attempt to pay for a service in the 
normal way; 
b) their lives would be otherwise in danger; 
c) they really want to. 
Since invoking the third rule always involved giving the editor a cut, 
Ford always preferred to much about with the first two. 
He stepped out along the street, walking briskly. 
The air was stifling, but he liked it because it was stifling city air, full
of excitingly unpleasant smells, dangerous music and the sound of 
warring police tribes. 
He carried his satchel with an easy swaying motion so that he could 
get a good swing at anybody who tried to take it from him without 
asking. It contained everything he owned, which at the moment 
wasn't much. 
A limousine careered down the street, dodging between the piles 
of burning garbage, and frightening an old pack animal which lurched, 
screeching, out of its way, stumbled against the window of a herbal 
remedies shop, set off a wailing alarm, blundered off down the street, 
and then pretended to fall down the steps of a small pasta restaurant 
where it knew it would get photographed and fed. 
Ford was walking north. He thought he was probably on his way to 
the spaceport, but he had thought that before. He knew he was going 
through that part of the city where people's plans often changed 
quite abruptly. 
"Do you want to have a good time?" said a voice from a doorway. 
"As far as I can tell," said Ford, "I'm having one. Thanks." 
"Are you rich?" said another. 
This made Ford laugh. 
He turned and opened his arms in a wide gesture. "Do I look rich?" 
he said. 
"Don't know," said the girl. "Maybe, maybe not. Maybe you'll get 
rich. I have a very special service for rich people..." 
"Oh yes?" said Ford, intrigued but careful. "And what's that?" 
"I tell them it's OK to be rich." 
Gunfire erupted from a window high above them, but it was only a 
bass player getting shot for playing the wrong riff three times in a row, 
and bass players are two a penny in Han Dold City. 
Ford stopped and peered into the dark doorway. 
"You what?" he said. 
The girl laughed and stepped forward a little out of the shadow. 
She was tall, and had that kind of self`possessed shyness which is a 
great trick if you can do it. 
"It's my big number," she saéd. "I have a Master's degree in Social 
Economics and can be very convincing. People love it. Especially in 
this city." 
"Goosnargh," said Ford Prefect, which was a special Betelgeusian 
word he used when he knew he should say something but didn't 
know what it should be. 
He sat on a step, took from his satchel a bottle of that Ol' Janx 
Spirit and a towel. He opened the bottle and wiped the top of it with 
the towel, which had the opposite effect to the one intended, in that 
the Ol' Janx Spirit instantly killed off millions of the germs which had 
been slowly building up quite a complex and enlightened civilization 
on the smellier patches of the towel. 
"Want some?" he said, after he'd had a swig himself. 
She shrugged and took the proffered bottle. 
They sat for a while, peacefully listening to the clamour of burglar 
alarms in the next block. 
"As it happens, I'm owed a lot of money," said Ford, "so if I ever get 
hold of it, can I come and see you then maybe?" 
"Sure, I'll be here," said the girl. "So how much is a lot?" 
"Fifteen years' back pay." 
"For?" 
"Writing two words." 
"Zarquon," said the girl. "Which one took the time?" 
"The first one. Once I'd got that the second one just came one 
afternoon after lunch." 
A huge electronic drum kit hurtled through the window high above 
them and smashed itself to bits in the street in front of them. 
It soon became apparent that some of the burglar alarms on the 
next block had been deliberately set off by one police tribe in order to 
lay an ambush for the other. Cars with screaming sirens converged on 
the area, only to find themselves being picked off by copters which 
came thudding through the air between the city's mountainous tower 
blocks. 
"In fact," said Ford, having to shout now above the din, "it wasn't 
quite like that. I wrote an awful lot, but they just cut it down." 
He took his copy of the Guide back out of his satchel. 
"Then the planet got demolished," he shouted. "Really worthwhile 
job, eh? They've still got to pay me, though." 
"You work for that thing?" the girl yelled back. 
"Yeah." 
"Good number." 
"You want to see the stuff I wrote?" he shouted. "Before it gets 
erased? The new revisions are due to be released tonight over the net. 
Someone must have found out that the planet I spent fifteen years on 
has been demolished by now. They missed it on the last few revisions, 
but it can't escape their notice for ever." 
"It's getting impossible to talk isn't it?" 
"What?" 
She shrugged and pointed upwards. 
There was a copter above them now which seemed to be involved 
in a side skirmish with the band upstairs. Smoke was billowing from 
the building. The sound engineer was hanging out of the window by 
his fingertips, and a maddened guitarist was beating on his fingers 
with a burning guitar. The helicopter was firing at all of them. 
"Can we move?" 
They wandered down the street, away from the noise. They ran 
into a street theatre group which tried to do a short play for them 
about the problems of the inner city, but then gave up and 
disappeared into the small restaurant most recently patronized by the 
pack animal. 
All the time, Ford was poking at the interface panel of the Guide. 
They ducked into an alleyway. Ford squatted on a garbage can while 
information began to flood over the screen of the Guide. 
He located his entry. 
"Earth: Mostly harmless." 
Almost immediately the screen became a mass of system messages. 
"Here it comes," he said. 
"Please wait," said the messages. "Entries are being updated over 
the Sub`Etha Net. This entry is being revised. The system will be down 
for ten seconds." 
At the end of the alley a steel grey limousine crawled past. 
"Hey look," said the girl, "if you get paid, look me up. I'm a working 
girl, and there are people over there who need me. I gotta go." 
She brushed aside Ford's half`articulated protests, and left him 
sitting dejectedly on his garbage can preparing to watch a large 
swathe of his working life being swept away electronically into the 
ether. 
Out in the street things had calmed down a little. The police battle 
had moved off to other sectors of the city, the few surviving members 
of the rock band had agreed to recognize their musical differences 
and pursue solo careers, the street theatre group were re`emerging 
from the pasta restaurant with the pack animal, telling it they would 
take it to a bar they knew where it would be treated with a little 
respect, and a little way further on the steel grey limousine was 
parked silently by the kerbside. 
The girl hurried towards it. 
Behind her, in the darkness of the alley, a green flickering glow was 
bathing Ford Prefect's face, and his eyes were slowly widening in 
astonishment. 
For where he had expected to find nothing, an erased, closed`off 
entry, there was instead a continuous stream of data`text, diagrams, 
figures and images, moving descriptions of surf on Australian beaches, 
Yoghurt on Greek islands, restaurants to avoid in Los Angeles, 
currency deals to avoid in Istanbul, weather to avoid in London, bars 
to go everywhere. Pages and pages of it. It was all there, everything 
he had written. 
With a deepening frown of blank incomprehension he went 
backwards and forwards through it, stopping here and there at 
various entries. 
Tips for aliens in New York: 
Land anywhere, Central Park, anywhere. No one will care, or 
indeed even notice. 
Surviving: get a job as cab driver immediately. A cab driver's job is 
to drive people anywhere they want to go in big yellow machines 
called taxis. Don't worry if you don't know how the machine works 
and you can't speak the language, don't understand the geography or 
indeed the basic physics of the area, and have large green antennae 
growing out of your head. Believe me, this is the best way of staying 
inconspicuous. 
If your body is really weird try showing it to people in the streets 
for money. 
Amphibious life forms from any of the worlds in the Swulling, 
Noxios or Nausalia systems will particularly enjoy the East River, 
which is said to be richer in those lovely life`giving nutrients then the 
finest and most virulent laboratory slime yet achieved. 
Having fun: This is the big section. It is impossible to have more fun 
without electrocuting your pleasure centres... 
Ford flipped the switch which he saw was now marked "Mode 
Execute Ready" instead of the now old`fashioned "Access Standby" 
which had so long ago replaced the appallingly stone`aged "Off". 
This was a planet he had seen completely destroyed, seen with his 
own two eyes or rather, blinded as he had been by the hellish 
disruption of air and light, felt with his own two feet as the ground 
had started to pound at him like a hammer, bucking, roaring, gripped 
by tidal waves of energy pouring out of the loathsome yellow Vogon 
ships. And then at last, five seconds after the moment he had 
determined as being the last possible moment had already passed, 
the gently swinging nausea of dematerialization as he and Arthur 
Dent had been beamed up through the atmosphere like a sports 
broadcast. 
There was no mistake, there couldn't have been. The Earth had 
definitely been destroyed. Definitely, definitely. Boiled away into 
space. 
And yet here ʹ he activated the Guide again ʹ was his own entry on 
how you would set about having a good time in Bournemouth, Dorset, 
England, which he had always prided himself on as being one of the 
most baroque pieces of invention he had ever delivered. He read it 
again and shook his head in sheer wonder. 
Suddenly he realized what the answer to the problem was, and it 
was this, that something very weird was happening; and if something 
very weird was happening, he thought, he wanted it to be happening 
to him. 
He stashed the Guide back in his satchel and hurried out on to the 
street again. 
Walking north he again passed a steel grey limousine parked by the 
kerbside, and from a nearby doorway he heard a soft voice saying, 
"It's OK, honey, it's really OK, you got to learn to feel good about it. 
Look at the way the whole economy is structured ..." 
Ford grinned, detoured round the next block which was now in 
flames, found a police helicopter which was standing unattended in 
the street, broke into it, strapped himself in, crossed his fingers and 
sent it hurtling inexpertly into the sky. 
He weaved terrifyingly up through the canyoned walls of the city, 
and once clear of them, hurtled through the black and red pall of 
smoke which hung permanently above it. 
Ten minutes later, with all the copter's sirens blaring and its rapid`
fire cannon blasting at random into the clouds, Ford Prefect brought it 
careering down among the gantries and landing lights at Han Dold 
spaceport, where it settled like a gigantic, startled and very noisy gnat. 
Since he hadn't damaged it too much he was able to trade it in for 
a first class ticket on the next ship leaving the system, and settled into 
one of its huge, voluptuous body`hugging seats. 
This was going to be fun, he thought to himself, as the ship blinked 
silently across the insane distances of deep space and the cabin 
service got into its full extravagant swing. 
"Yes please," he said to the cabin attendants whenever they glided 
up to offer him anything at all. 
He smiled with a curious kind of manic joy as he flipped again 
through the mysteriously re`instated entry on the planet Earth. He 
had a major piece of unfinished business that he would now be able 
to attend to, and was terribly pleased that life had suddenly furnished 
him with a serious goal to achieve. 
It suddenly occurred to him to wonder where Arthur Dent was, and 
if he knew. 
Arthur Dent was one thousand, four hundred and thirty`seven light 
years away in a Saab, and anxious. 
Behind him in the backseat was a girl who had made him crack his 
head on the door as he climbed in. He didn't know if it was just 
because she was the first female of his own species that he had laid 
eyes on in years, or what it was, but he felt stupefied with, with... This 
is absurd, he told himself. Calm down, he told himself. You are not, he 
continued to himself in the firmest internal voice he could muster, in 
a fit and rational state. You have just hitch`hiked over a hundred 
thousand light years across the galaxy, you are very tired, a little 
confused and extremely vulnerable. Relax, don't panic, concentrate 
on breathing deeply. 
He twisted round in his seat. 
"Are you sure she's all right?" he said again. 
Beyond the fact that she was, to him, heartthumpingly beautiful, 
he could make out very little, how tall she was, how old she was, the 
exact shading of her hair. And nor could he ask her anything about 
herself because, sadly, she was completely unconscious. 
"She's just drugged," said her brother, shrugging, not moving his 
eyes from the road ahead. 
"And that's all right, is it?" said Arthur, in alarm. 
"Suits me," he said. 
"Ah," said Arthur. "Er," he added after a moment's thought. 
The conversation so far had been going astoundingly badly. 
After an initial flurry of opening hellos, he and Russell ʹ the 
wonderful girl's brother's name was Russell, a name which, to 
Arthur's mind, always suggested burly men with blond moustaches 
and blow`dried hair, who would at the slightest provocation start 
wearing velvet tuxedos and frilly shirtfronts and would then have to 
be forcibly restrained from commentating on snooker matches ʹ had 
quickly discovered they didn't like each other at all. 
Russell was a burly man. He had a blond moustache. His hair was 
fine and blow dried. To be fair to him ʹ though Arthur didn't see any 
necessity for this beyond the sheer mental exercise of it ʹ he, Arthur, 
was looking pretty grim himself. A man can't cross a hundred 
thousand light years, mostly in other people's baggage compartments, 
without beginning to fray a little, and Arthur had frayed a lot. 
"She's not a junkie," said Russell suddenly, as if he clearly thought 
that someone else in the car might be. "She's under sedation." 
"But that's terrible," said Arthur, twisting round to look at her again. 
She seemed to stir slightly and her head slipped sideways on her 
shoulder. Her dark hair fell across her face, obscuring it. 
"What's the matter with her, is she ill?" 
"No," said Russell, "merely barking mad." 
"What?" said Arthur, horrified. 
"Loopy, completely bananas. I'm taking her back to the hospital 
and telling them to have another go. They let her out while she still 
thought she was a hedgehog." 
"A hedgehog?" 
Russell hooted his horn fiercely at the car that came round the 
corner towards them half`way on to their side of the road, making 
them swerve. The anger seemed to make him feel better. 
"Well, maybe not a hedgehog," he said after he'd settled down 
again. "Though it would probably be simpler to deal with if she did. If 
somebody thinks they're a hedgehog, presumably you just give 'em a 
mirror and a few pictures of hedgehogs and tell them to sort it out for 
themselves, come down again when they feel better. At least medical 
science could deal with it, that's the point. Seems that's no good 
enough for Fenny, though." 
"Fenny...?" 
"You know what I got her for Christmas?" 
"Well, no." 
"Black's Medical Dictionary." 
"Nice present." 
"I thought so. Thousands of diseases in it, all in alphabetical order." 
"You say her name is Fenny?" 
"Yeah. Take your pick, I said. Anything in here can be dealt with. 
The proper drugs can be prescribed. But no, she has to have 
something different. Just to make life difficult. She was like that at 
school, you know." 
"Was she?" 
"She was. Fell over playing hockey and broke a bone nobody had 
ever heard of." 
"I can see how that would be irritating," said Arthur doubtfully. He 
was rather disappointed to discover her name was Fenny. It was a 
rather silly, dispiriting name, such as an unlovely maiden aunt might 
vote herself if she couldn't sustain the name Fenella properly. 
"Not that I wasn't sympathetic," continued Russell, "but it did get a 
bit irritating. She was limping for months." 
He slowed down. 
"This is your turning isn't it?" 
"Ah, no," said Arthur, "five miles further on. If that's all right." 
"OK," said Russell after a very tiny pause to indicate that it wasn't, 
and speeded up again. 
It was in fact Arthur's turning, but he couldn't leave without finding 
out something more about this girl who seemed to have taken such a 
grip on his mind without even waking up. He could take either of the 
next two turnings. 
They led back to the village that had been his home, though what 
he would find there he hesitated to imagine. Familiar landmarks had 
been flitting by, ghostlike, in the dark, giving rise to the shudders that 
only very normal things can create, when seen where the mind is 
unprepared for them, and in an unfamiliar light. 
By his own personal time scale, so far as he could estimate it, living 
as he had been under the alien rotations of distant suns, it was eight 
years since he had left, but what time had passed here he could 
hardly guess. Indeed, what events had passed were beyond his 
exhausted comprehension because this planet, his home, should not 
be here. 
Eight years ago, at lunchtime, this planet had been demolished, 
utterly destroyed, by the huge yellow Vogon ships which had hung in 
the lunchtime sky as if the law of gravity was no more than a local 
regulation, and breaking it no more than a parking offence. 
"Delusions," said Russell. 
"What?" said Arthur, started out of his train of thought. 
"She says she suffers from strange delusions that she's living in the 
real world. It's no good telling her that she is living in the real world 
because she just says that's why the delusions are so strange. Don't 
know about you, but I find that kind of conversation pretty exhausting. 
Give her the tablets and piss off for a beer is my answer. I mean you 
can only muck about so much can't you?" 
Arthur frowned, not for the first time. 
"Well..." 
"And all this dreams and nightmare stuff. And the doctors going on 
about strange jumps in her brainwave patterns." 
"Jumps?" 
"This," said Fenny. 
Arthur whirled round in his seat and stared into her suddenly open 
but utterly vacant eyes. Whatever she was looking at wasn't in the car. 
Her eyes fluttered, her head jerked once, and then she was sleeping 
peacefully. 
"What did she say?" he asked anxiously. 
"She said 'this'." 
"This what?" 
"This what? How the heck should I know? This hedgehog, that 
chimney pot, the other pair of Don Alfonso's tweezers. She's barking 
mad, I thought I'd mentioned that." 
"You don't seem to care very much." Arthur tried to say it as 
matter`of`factly as possible but it didn't seem to work. 
"Look, buster..." 
"OK, I'm sorry. It's none of my business. I didn't mean it to sound 
like that," said Arthur. "I know you care a lot, obviously," he added, 
lying. "I know that you have to deal with it somehow. You'll have to 
excuse me. I just hitched from the other side of the Horsehead 
Nebula." 
He stared furiously out of the window. 
He was astonished that of all the sensations fighting for room in his 
head on this night as he returned to the home that he had thought 
had vanished into oblivion for ever, the one that was compelling him 
was an obsession with this bizarre girl of whom he knew nothing 
other than that she had said "this" to him, and that he wouldn't wish 
her brother on a Vogon. 
"So, er, what were the jumps, these jumps you mentioned?" he 
went on to say as quickly as he could. 
"Look, this is my sister, I don't even know why I'm talking to you 
about..." 
"OK, I'm sorry. Perhaps you'd better let me out. This is..." 
At the moment he said it, it became impossible, because the storm 
which had passed them by suddenly erupted again. Lightning belted 
through the sky, and someone seemed to be pouring something 
which closely resembled the Atlantic Ocean over them through a 
sieve. 
Russell swore and steered intently for a few seconds as the sky 
blattered at them. He worked out his anger by rashly accelerating to 
pass a lorry marked "McKeena's All`Weather Haulage". The tension 
eased as the rain subsided. 
"It started with all that business of the CIA agent they found in the 
reservoir, when everybody had all the hallucinations and everything, 
you remember?" 
Arthur wondered for a moment whether to mention again that he 
had just hitch`hiked back from the other side of the Horsehead 
Nebula and was for this and various other related and astounding 
reasons a little out of touch with recent events, but he decided it 
would only confuse matters further. 
"No," he said. 
"That was the moment she cracked up. She was in a cafe 
somewhere. Rickmansworth. Don't know what she was doing there, 
but that was where she cracked up. Apparently she stood up, calmly 
announced that she had undergone some extraordinary revelation or 
something, wobbled a bit, looked confused, and finally collapsed 
screaming into an egg sandwich." 
Arthur winced. "I'm very sorry to hear that," he said a little stiffly. 
Russell made a sort of grumping noise. 
"So what," said Arthur in an attempt to piece things together, "was 
the CIA agent doing in the reservoir?" 
"Bobbing up and down of course. He was dead." 
"But what..." 
"Come on, you remember all that stuff. The hallucinations. 
Everyone said it was a cock up, the CIA trying experiments into drug 
warfare or something. Some crackpot theory that instead of invading 
a country it would be much cheaper and more effective to make 
everyone think they'd been invaded." 
"What hallucinations were those exactly...?" said Arthur in a rather 
quiet voice. 
"What do you mean, what hallucinations? I'm talking about all that 
stuff with the big yellow ships, everyone going crazy and saying we're 
going to die, and then pop, they vanished as the effect wore off. The 
CIA denied it which meant it must be true." 
Arthur's head went a little swimmy. His hand grabbed at something 
to steady himself, and gripped it tightly. His mouth made little 
opening and closing movements as if it was on his mind to say 
something, but nothing emerged. 
"Anyway," continued Russell, "whatever drug it was it didn't seem 
to wear off so fast with Fenny. I was all for suing the CIA, but a lawyer 
friend of mine said it would be like trying to attack a lunatic asylum 
with a banana, so..." He shrugged. 
"The Vogon..." squeaked Arthur. "The yellow ships... vanished?" 
"Well, of course they did, they were hallucinations," said Russell, 
and looked at Arthur oddly. "You trying to say you don't remember 
any of this? Where have you been for heaven's sake?" 
This was, to Arthur, such an astonishingly good question that he 
half`leapt out of his seat with shock. 
"Christ   " yelled Russell, fighting to control the car which was 
suddenly trying to skid. He pulled it out of the path of an oncoming 
lorry and swerved up on to a grass bank. As the car lurched to a halt, 
the girl in the back was thrown against Russell's seat and collapsed 
awkwardly. 
Arthur twisted round in horror. 
"Is she all right?" he blurted out. 
Russell swept his hands angrily back through his blow`dried hair. 
He tugged at his blond moustache. He turned to Arthur. 
"Would you please," he said, "let go of the handbrake?" 
Chapter 6
From here it was a four`mile walk to his village: a further mile to 
the turning, to which the abominable Russell had now fiercely 
declined to take him, and from there a further three miles of winding 
country lane. 
The Saab seethed off into the night. Arthur watched it go, as 
stunned as a man might be who, having believed himself to be totally 
blind for five years, suddenly discovers that he had merely been 
wearing too large a hat. 
He shook his head sharply in the hope that it might dislodge some 
salient fact which would fall into place and make sense of an 
otherwise utterly bewildering Universe, but since the salient fact, if 
there was one, entirely failed to do this, he set off up the road again, 
hoping that a good vigorous walk, and maybe even some good painful 
blisters, would help to reassure him of his own existence at least, if 
not his sanity. 
It was 10.30 when he arrived, a fact he discovered from the 
steamed and greasy window of the Horse and Groom pub, in which 
there had hung for many years a battered old Guiness clock which 
featured a picture of an emu with a pint glass jammed rather 
amusingly down its throat. 
This was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime 
during which first his house and then the entire planet Earth had been 
demolished, or rather had seemed to be demolished. No, damn it, 
had been demolished, because if it hadn't then where the bloody 
heck had he been for the last eight years, and how he had got there if 
not in one of the big yellow Vogon ships which the appalling Russell 
had just been telling him were merely drug`induced hallucinations, 
and yet if it had been demolished, what was he currently standing 
on...? 
He jammed the brake on this line of thought because it wasn't 
going to get him any further than it had the last twenty times he'd 
been over it. 
He started again. 
This was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime 
during which whatever it was had happened that he was going to sort 
out later had happened, and... 
It still didn't make sense. 
He started again. 
This was the pub in which... 
This was a pub. 
Pubs served drinks and he couldn't half do with one. 
Satisfied that his jumbled thought processes had at last arrived at a 
conclusion, and a conclusion he was happy with, even if it wasn't the 
one he had set out to achieve, he strode towards the door. 
And stopped. 
A small black wire`haired terrier ran out from behind a low wall 
and then, catching sight of Arthur, began to snarl. 
Now Arthur knew this dog, and he knew it well. It belonged to an 
advertising friend of his, and was called Know`Nothing`Bozo because 
the way its hair stood up on its head it reminded people of the 
President of the United States, and the dog knew Arthur, or at least 
should do. It was a stupid dog, could not even read an autocue, which 
way why some people had protested about its name, but it should at 
least have been able to recognize Arthur instead of standing there, 
hackles raised, as if Arthur was the most fearful apparition ever to 
intrude upon its feeble`witted life. 
This prompted Arthur to go and peer at the window again, this 
time with an eye not for the asphyxiating emu but for himself. 
Seeing himself for the first time suddenly in a familiar context, he 
had to admit that the dog had a point. 
He looked a lot like something a farmer would use to scare birds 
with, and there was no doubt but that to go into the pub in his 
present condition would excite comments of a raucous kind, and 
worse still, there would doubtless be several people in there at the 
moment whom he knew, all of whom would be bound to bombard 
him with questions which, at the moment, he felt ill`equipped to deal 
with. 
Will Smithers, for instance, the owner of Know`Nothing`Bozo the 
Non`Wonder Dog, an animal so stupid that it had been sacked from 
one of Will's own commercials for being incapable of knowing which 
dog food it was supposed to prefer, despite the fact that the meat in 
all the other bowls had had engine oil poured over it. 
Will would definitely be in there. Here was his dog, here was his car, 
a grey Porsche 928S with a sign in the back window which read, "My 
other car is also a Porsche." Damn him. 
He stared at it and realized that he had just learned something he 
hadn't known before. 
Will Smithers, like most of the overpaid and under`scrupulous 
bastards Arthur knew in advertising made a point of changing his car 
every August so that he could tell people his accountant made him do 
it, though the truth was that his accountant was trying like hell to stop 
him, what with all the alimony he had to pay, and so on ʹ and this was 
the same car Arthur remembered him having before. The number 
plate proclaimed its year. 
Given that it was now winter, and that the event which had caused 
Arthur so much trouble eight of his personal years ago had occurred 
at the beginning of September, less than six or seven months could 
have passed here. 
He stood terribly still for a moment and let Know`Nothing`Bozo 
jump up and down yapping at him. He was suddenly stunned by a 
realization he could no longer avoid, which was this: he was now an 
alien on his own world. Try as he might, no one was even to be able 
to believe his story. Not only did it sound perfectly potty, but it was 
flatly contradicted by the simplest observable facts. 
Was this really the Earth? Was there the slightest possibility that he 
had made some extraordinary mistake? 
The pub in front of him was unbearably familiar to him in every 
detail ʹ every brick, every piece of peeling paint; and inside he could 
sense its familiar stuffy, noisy warmth, its exposed beams, its 
unauthentic cast`iron light fittings, its bar sticky with beer that people 
he knew had put their elbows in, overlooked by cardboard cutouts of 
girls with packets of peanuts stapled all over their breasts. It was all 
the stuff of his home, his world. 
He even knew this blasted dog. 
"Hey, Know`Nothing " 
The sound of Will Smithers' voice meant he had to decide what do 
to quickly. If he stood his ground he would be discovered and the 
whole circus would begin. To hide would only postpone the moment, 
and it was bitterly cold now. 
The fact that it was Will made the choice easier. It wasn't that 
Arthur disliked him as such`Will was quite fun. It was just that he was 
fun in such an exhausting way because, being in advertising, he 
always wanted you to know how much fun he was having and where 
he had got his jacket from. 
Mindful of this, Arthur hid behind a van. 
"Hey, Know`Nothing, what's up?" 
The door opened and Will came out, wearing a leather flying jacket 
that he'd got a mate of his at the Road Research Laboratory to crash a 
car into specially, in order to get that battered look. Know`Nothing 
yelped with delight and, having got the attention it wanted, was 
happy to forget Arthur. 
Will was with some friends, and they had a game they played with 
the dog. 
"Commies " they all shouted at the dog in chorus. "Commies, 
commies, commies   " 
The dog went berserk with barking, prancing up and down, yapping 
its little heart out, beside itself in transports of ecstatic rage. They all 
laughed and cheered it on, then gradually dispersed to their various 
cars and disappeared into the night. 
Well that clears one thing up, thought Arthur from behind the van, 
this is quite definitely the planet I remember. 
Chapter 7
His house was still there. 
How or why, he had no idea. He had decided to go and have a look 
while he was waiting for the pub to empty, so that he could go and 
ask the landlord for a bed for the night when everyone else had gone. 
And there it was. 
He hurriedly let himself in with the key he kept under a stone frog 
in the garden, because, astoundingly, the phone was ringing. 
He had heard it faintly all the way up the lane and had started to 
run as soon as he realized where the sound was coming from. 
The door had to be forced open because of the astonishing 
accumulation of junk mail on the doormat. It jammed itself stuck on 
what he would later discover were fourteen identical, personally 
addressed invitations to apply for a credit card he already had, 
seventeen identical threatening letters for non`payment of bills on a 
credit card he didn't have, thirty`three identical letters saying that he 
personally had been specially selected as a man of taste and 
discrimination who knew what he wanted and where he was going in 
today's sophisticated jet`setting world and would he therefore like to 
buy some grotty wallet, and also a dead tabby kitten. 
He rammed himself through the relatively narrow opening afforded 
by all this, stumbled through a pile of wine offers that no 
discriminating connoisseur would want to miss, slithered over a heap 
of beach villa holidays, blundered up the dark stairs to his bedroom 
and got to the phone just as it stopped ringing. 
He collapsed, panting, on to his cold, musty`smelling bed and for a 
few minutes stopped trying to prevent the world from spinning round 
his head in the way it obviously wanted to. 
When it had enjoyed its little spin and had calmed down a bit, 
Arthur reached out for the bedside light, not expecting it to come on. 
To his surprise it did. This appealed to Arthur's sense of logic. Since 
the Electricity Board cut him off without fail every time he paid his bill, 
it seemed only reasonable that they should leave him connected 
when he didn't. Sending them money obviously only drew attention 
to yourself. 
The room was much as he had left it, i.e. festeringly untidy, though 
the effect was muted a little by a thick layer of dust. Half`read books 
and magazines nestled amongst piles of half`used towels. Half pairs of 
socks reclined in half`drunk cups of coffee. What was once a half`
eaten sandwich had now half`turned into something that Arthur 
entirely didn't want to know about. Bung a fork of lightning through 
this lot, he thought to himself, and you'd start the evolution of life all 
over again. 
There was only one thing in the room that was different. 
For a moment or so he couldn't see what the one thing that was 
different was, because it too was covered in a film of disgusting dust. 
Then his eyes caught it and stopped. 
It was next to a battered old television on which it was only 
possible to watch Open University Study Courses, because if it tried to 
show anything more exciting it would break down. 
It was a box. 
Arthur pushed himself up on his elbows and peered at it. 
It was a grey box, with a kind of dull lustre to it. It was a cubic grey 
box, just over a foot on a side. It was tied with a single grey ribbon, 
knotted into a neat bow on the top. 
He got up, walked over and touched it in surprise. Whatever it was 
clearly gift`wrapped, neatly and beautifully, and was waiting for him 
to open it. 
Cautiously, he picked it up and carried it back to the bed. He 
brushed the dust off the top and loosened the ribbon. The top of the 
box was a lid, with a flap tucked into the body of the box. 
He untucked it and looked into the box. In it was a glass globe, 
nestling in fine grey tissue paper. He drew it out, carefully. It wasn't a 
proper globe because it was open at the bottom, or, as Arthur 
realized turning it over, at the top, with a thick rim. It was a bowl. A 
fish bowl. 
It was made of the most wonderful glass perfectly transparent, yet 
with an extraordinary silver`grey quality as if crystal and slate had 
gone into its making. 
Arthur slowly turned it over and over in his hands. It was one of the 
most beautiful objects he had ever seen, but he was entirely 
perplexed by it. He looked into the box, but other than the tissue 
paper there was nothing. On the outside of the box there was nothing. 
He turned the bowl round again. It was wonderful. It was exquisite. 
But it was a fish bowl. 
He tapped it with his thumbnail and it rang with a deep and 
glorious chime which was sustained for longer than seemed possible, 
and when at last it faded seemed not to die away but to drift off into 
other worlds, as into a deep sea dream. 
Entranced, Arthur turned it round yet again, and this time the light 
from the dusty little bedside lamp caught it at a different angle and 
glittered on some fine abrasions on the fish bowl's surface. He held it 
up, adjusting the angle to the light, and suddenly saw clearly the 
finely engraved shapes of words shadowed on the glass. 
"So Long," they said, "and Thanks..." 
And that was all. He blinked, and understood nothing. 
For fully five more minutes he turned the object round and around, 
held it to the light at different angles, tapped it for its mesmerizing 
chime and pondered on the meaning of the shadowy letters but could 
find none. Finally he stood up, filled the bowl with water from the tap 
and put it back on the table next to the television. He shook the little 
Babel fish from his ear and dropped it, wriggling, into the bowl. He 
wouldn't be needing it any more, except for watching foreign movies. 
He returned to lie on his bed, and turned out the light. 
He lay still and quiet. He absorbed the enveloping darkness, slowly 
relaxed his limbs from end to end, eased and regulated his breathing, 
gradually cleared his mind of all thought, closed his eyes and was 
completely incapable of getting to sleep. 
The night was uneasy with rain. The rain clouds themselves had 
now moved on and were currently concentrating their attention on a 
small transport cafe just outside Bournemouth, but the sky through 
which they had passed had been disturbed by them and now wore a 
damply ruffled air, as if it didn't know what else it might not do it 
further provoked. 
The moon was out in a watery way. It looked like a ball of paper 
from the back pocket of jeans that have just come out of the washing 
machine, and which only time and ironing would tell if it was an old 
shopping list or a five pound note. 
The wind flicked about a little, like the tail of a horse that's trying to 
decide what sort of mood it's in tonight, and a bell somewhere 
chimed midnight. 
A skylight creaked open. 
It was stiff and had to be jiggled and persuaded a little because the 
frame was slightly rotten and the hinges had at some time in its life 
been rather sensibly painted over, but eventually it was open. 
A strut was found to prop it and a figure struggled out into the 
narrow gully between the opposing pitches of the roof. 
It stood and watched the sky in silence. 
The figure was completely unrecognizable as the wild`looking 
creature who had burst crazily into the cottage a little over an hour 
ago. Gone was the ragged threadbare dressing gown, smeared with 
the mud of a hundred worlds, stained with junk food condiment from 
a hundred grimy spaceports, gone was the tangled mane of hair, gone 
the long and knotted beard, flourishing ecosystem and all. 
Instead, there was Arthur Dent the smooth and casual, in 
corduroys and a chunky sweater. His hair was cropped and washed, 
his chin clean shaven. Only the eyes still said that whatever it was the 
Universe thought it was doing to him, he would still like it please to 
stop. 
They were not the same eyes with which he had last looked out at 
this particular scene, and the brain which interpreted the images the 
eyes resolved was not the same brain. There had been no surgery 
involved, just the continual wrenching of experience. 
The night seemed like an alive thing to him at this moment, the 
dark earth around him a being in which he was rooted. 
He could feel like a tingle on distant nerve ends the flood of a far 
river, the roll of invisible hills, the knot of heavy rainclouds parked 
somewhere away to the south. 
He could sense, too, the thrill of being a tree, which was something 
he hadn't expected. He knew that it felt good to curl your toes in the 
earth, but he'd never realized it could feel quite as good as that. He 
could sense an almost unseemly wave of pleasure reaching out to him 
all the way from the New Forest. He must try this summer, he thought, 
and see what having leaves felt like. 
From another direction he felt the sensation of being a sheep 
startled by a flying saucer, but it was virtually indistinguishable from 
the feeling of being a sheep startled by anything else it ever 
encountered, for they were creatures who learned very little on their 
journey through life, and would be startled to see the sun rising in the 
morning, and astonished by all the green stuff in the fields. 
He was surprised to find he could feel the sheep being startled by 
the sun that morning, and the morning before, and being startled by a 
clump of trees the day before that. He could go further and further 
back, but it got dull because all it consisted of was sheep being 
startled by things they'd been startled by the day before. 
He left the sheep and let his mind drift outwards sleepily in 
developing ripples. It felt the presence of other minds, hundreds of 
them, thousands in a web, some sleepy, some sleeping, some terribly 
excited, one fractured. 
One fractured. 
He passed it fleetingly and tried to feel for it again, but it eluded 
him like the other card with an apple on it in Pelmanism. He felt a 
spasm of excitement because he knew instinctively who it was, or at 
least knew who it was he wanted it to be, and once you know what it 
is you want to be true, instinct is a very useful device for enabling you 
to know that it is. 
He instinctively knew that it was Fenny and that he wanted to find 
her; but he could not. By straining too much for it, he could feel he 
was losing this strange new faculty, so he relaxed the search and let 
his mind wander more easily once more. 
And again, he felt the fracture. 
Again he couldn't find it. This time, whatever his instinct was busy 
telling him it was all right to believe, he wasn't certain that it was 
Fenny ʹ or perhaps it was a different fracture this time. It had the 
same disjointed quality but it seemed a more general feeling of 
fracture, deeper, not a single mind, maybe not a mind at all. It was 
different. 
He let his mind sink slowly and widely into the Earth, rippling, 
seeping, sinking. 
He was following the Earth through its days, drifting with the 
rhythms of its myriad pulses, seeping through the webs of its life, 
swelling with its tides, turning with its weight. Always the fracture 
kept returning, a dull disjointed distant ache. 
And now he was flying through a land of light; the light was time, 
the tides of it were days receding. The fracture he had sensed, the 
second fracture, lay in the distance before him across the land, the 
thickness of a single hair across the dreaming landscape of the days of 
Earth. 
And suddenly he was upon it. 
He danced dizzily over the edge as the dreamland dropped sheer 
away beneath him, a stupefying precipice into nothing, him wildly 
twisting, clawing at nothing, flailing in horrifying space, spinning, 
falling. 
Across the jagged chasm had been another land, another time, an 
older world, not fractured from, but hardly joined: two Earths. He 
woke. 
A cold breeze brushed the feverish sweat standing on his forehead. 
The nightmare was spent and so, he felt, was he. His shoulders 
dropped, he gently rubbed his eyes with the tips of his fingers. At last 
he was sleepy as well as very tired. As to what it meant, if it meant 
anything at all, he would think about it in the morning; for now he 
would go to bed and sleep. His own bed, his own sleep. 
He could see his house in the distance and wondered why this was. 
It was silhouetted against the moonlight and he recognized its rather 
dull blockish shape. He looked about him and noticed that he was 
about eighteen inches above the rose bushes of one of his neighbours, 
John Ainsworth. His rose bushes were carefully tended, pruned back 
for the winter, strapped to canes and labelled, and Arthur wondered 
what he was doing above them. He wondered what was holding him 
there, and when he discovered that nothing was holding him there he 
crashed awkwardly to the ground. 
He picked himself up, brushed himself down and hobbled back to 
his house on a sprained ankle. He undressed and toppled into bed. 
While he was asleep the phone rang again. It rang for fully fifteen 
minutes and caused him to turn over twice. It never, however, stood 
a chance of waking him up. 
Chapter 8
Arthur awoke feeling wonderful, absolutely fabulous, refreshed, 
overjoyed to be home, bouncing with energy, hardly disappointed at 
all to discover it was the middle of February. 
He almost danced to the fridge, found the three least hairy things 
in it, put them on a plate and watched them intently for two minutes. 
Since they made no attempt to move within that time he called them 
breakfast and ate them. Between them they killed a virulent space 
disease he's picked up without knowing it in the Flargathon Gas 
Swamps a few days earlier, which otherwise would have killed off half 
the population of the Western Hemisphere, blinded the other half 
and driven everyone else psychotic and sterile, so the Earth was lucky 
there. 
He felt strong, he felt healthy. He vigorously cleared away the junk 
mail with a spade and then buried the cat. 
Just as he was finishing that, the phone went, but he let it ring 
while he maintained a moment's respectful silence. Whoever it was 
would ring back if it was important. 
He kicked the mud off his shoes and went back inside. 
There had been a small number of significant letters in the piles of 
junk ʹ some documents from the council, dated three years earlier, 
relating to the proposed demolition of his house, and some other 
letters about the setting up of a public inquiry into the whole bypass 
scheme in the area; there was also an old letter from Greenpeace, the 
ecological pressure group to which he occasionally made 
contributions, asking for help with their scheme to release dolphins 
and orcas from captivity, and some postcards from friends, vaguely 
complaining that he never got in touch these days. 
He collected these together and put them in a cardboard file which 
he marked "Things To Do". Since he was feeling so vigorous and 
dynamic that morning, he even added the word "Urgent " 
He unpacked his towel and another few odd bits and pieces from 
the plastic bag he had acquired at the Port Brasta Mega`Market. The 
slogan on the side was a clever and elaborate pun in Lingua Centauri 
which was completely incomprehensible in any other language and 
therefore entirely pointless for a Duty Free Shop at a spaceport. The 
bag also had a hole in it so he threw it away. 
He realized with a sudden twinge that something else must have 
dropped out in the small spacecraft that had brought him to Earth, 
kindly going out of its way to drop him right beside the A303. He had 
lost his battered and spaceworn copy of the thing which had helped 
him find his way across the unbelievable wastes of space he had 
traversed. He had lost the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. 
Well, he told himself, this time I really won't be needing it again. 
He had some calls to make. 
He had decided how to deal with the mass of contradictions his 
return journey precipitated, which was that he would simply brazen it 
out. 
He phoned the BBC and asked to be put through to his department 
head. 
"Oh, hello, Arthur Dent here. Look, sorry I haven't been in for six 
months but I've gone mad." 
"Oh, not to worry. Thought it was probably something like that. 
Happens here all the time. How soon can we expect you?" 
"When do hedgehogs stop hibernating?" 
"Sometime in spring I think." 
"I'll be in shortly after that." 
"Rightyho." 
He flipped through the Yellow Pages and made a short list of 
numbers to try. 
"Oh hello, is that the Old Elms Hospital? Yes, I was just phoning to 
see if I could have a word with Fenella, er... Fenella ʹ Good Lord, silly 
me, I'll forget my own name next, er, Fenella ʹ isn't this ridiculous? 
Patient of yours, dark haired girl, came in last night..." 
"I'm afraid we don't have any patients called Fenella." 
"Oh, don't you? I mean Fiona of course, we just call her Fen..." 
"I'm sorry, goodbye." 
Click. 
Six conversations along these lines began to take their toll on his 
mood of vigorous, dynamic optimism, and he decided that before it 
deserted him entirely he would take it down to the pub and parade it 
a little. 
He had had the perfect idea for explaining away every inexplicable 
weirdness about himself at a stroke, and he whistled to himself as he 
pushed open the door which had so daunted him last night. 
"Arthur    " 
He grinned cheerfully at the boggling eyes that stared at him from 
all corners of the pub, and told them all what a wonderful time he'd 
had in Southern California. 
Chapter 9
He accepted another pint and took a pull at it. 
"Of course, I had my own personal alchemist too." 
"You what?" 
He was getting silly and he knew it. Exuberance and Hall and 
Woodhouse best bitter was a mixture to be wary of, but one of the 
first effects it had is to stop you being wary of things, and the point at 
which Arthur should have stopped and explained no more was the 
point at which he started instead to get inventive. 
"Oh yes," he insisted with a happy glazed smile. "It's why I've lost 
so much weight." 
"What?" said his audience. 
"Oh yes," he said again. "The Californians have rediscovered 
alchemy. Oh yes." 
He smiled again. 
"Only," he said, "it's in a much more useful form than that which 
in..." He paused thoughtfully to let a little grammar assemble in his 
head. "In which the ancients used to practise it. Or at least," he added, 
"failed to practise it. They couldn't get it to work you know. 
Nostradamus and that lot. Couldn't cut it." 
"Nostradamus?" said one of his audience. 
"I didn't think he was an alchemist," said another. 
"I thought," said a third, "he was a seer." 
"He became a seer," said Arthur to his audience, the component 
parts of which were beginning to bob and blur a little, "because he 
was such a lousy alchemist. You should know that." 
He took another pull at his beer. It was something he had not 
tasted for eight years. He tasted it and tasted it. 
"What has alchemy got to do," asked a bit of the audience, "with 
losing weight?" 
"I'm glad you asked that," said Arthur. "Very glad. And I will now 
tell you what the connection is between..." He paused. "Between 
those two things. The things you mentioned. I'll tell you." 
He paused and manoeuvred his thoughts. It was like watching oil 
tankers doing three`point turns in the English Channel. 
"They've discovered how to turn excess body fat into gold," he said, 
in a sudden blur of coherence. 
"You're kidding." 
"Oh yes," he said, "no," he corrected himself, "they have." 
He rounded on the doubting part of his audience, which was all of 
it, and so it took a little while to round on it completely. 
"Have you been to California?" he demanded. "Do you know the 
sort of stuff they do there?" 
Three members of his audience said they had and that he was 
talking nonsense. 
"You haven't seen anything," insisted Arthur. "Oh yes," he added, 
because someone was offering to buy another round. 
"The evidence," he said, pointing at himself, and not missing by 
more than a couple of inches, "is before your eyes. Fourteen hours in 
a trance," he said, "in a tank. In a trance. I was in a tank. I think," he 
added after a thoughtful pause, "I already said that." 
He waited patiently while the next round was duly distributed. He 
composed the next bit of his story in his mind, which was going to be 
something about the tank needing to be orientated along a line 
dropped perpendicularly from the Pole Star to a baseline drawn 
between Mars and Venus, and was about to start trying to say it when 
he decided to give it a miss. 
"Long time," he said instead, "in a tank. In a trance." He looked 
round severely at his audience, to make sure it was all following 
attentively. 
He resumed. 
"Where was I?" he said. 
"In a trance," said one. 
"In a tank," said another. 
"Oh yes," said Arthur. "Thank you. And slowly," he said pressing 
onwards, "slowly, slowly, all your excess body fat... turns... to..." he 
paused for effect, "subcoo... subyoo... subtoocay..." ʹ he paused for 
breath ʹ "subcutaneous gold, which you can have surgically removed. 
Getting out of the tank is hell. What did you say?" 
"I was just clearing my throat." 
"I think you doubt me." 
"I was clearing my throat." 
"She was clearing her throat," confirmed a significant part of the 
audience in a low rumble. 
"Oh yes," said Arthur, "all right. And you then split the proceeds..." 
he paused again for a maths break, "fifty`fifty with the alchemist. 
Make a lot of money " 
He looked swayingly around at his audience, and could not help but 
be aware of an air of scepticism about their jumbled faces. 
He felt very affronted by this. 
"How else," he demanded, "could I afford to have my face 
dropped?" 
Friendly arms began to help him home. "Listen," he protested, as 
the cold February breeze brushed his face, "looking lived`in is all the 
rage in California at the moment. You've got to look as if you've seen 
the Galaxy. Life, I mean. You've got to look as if you've seen life. 
That's what I got. A face drop. Give me eight years, I said. I hope being 
thirty doesn't come back into fashion or I've wasted a lot of money." 
He lapsed into silence for a while as the friendly arms continued to 
help him along the lane to his house. 
"Got in yesterday," he mumbled. "I'm very happy to be home. Or 
somewhere very like it..." 
"Jet lag," muttered one of his friends. "Long trip from California. 
Really mucks you up for a couple of days." 
"I don't think he's been there at all," muttered another. "I wonder 
where he has been. And what's happened to him." 
After a little sleep Arthur got up and pottered round the house a 
bit. He felt woozy and a little low, still disoriented by the journey. He 
wondered how he was going to find Fenny. 
He sat and looked at the fish bowl. He tapped it again, and despite 
being full of water and a small yellow Babel fish which was gulping its 
way around rather dejectedly, it still chimed its deep and resonant 
chime as clearly and mesmerically as before. 
Someone is trying to thank me, he thought to himself. He 
wondered who, and for what. 
Chapter 10
"At the third stroke it will be one... thirty`two... and twenty 
seconds. 
"Beep... beep... beep." 
Ford Prefect suppressed a little giggle of evil satisfaction, realized 
that he had no reason to suppress it, and laughed out loud, a wicked 
laugh. 
He switched the incoming signal through from the Sub`Etha Net to 
the ship's hi`fi system, and the odd, rather stilted, sing`song voice 
spoke out with remarkable clarity round the cabin. 
"At the third stroke it will be one... thirty`two... and thirty seconds. 
"Beep... beep... beep." 
He tweaked the volume up just a little while keeping a careful eye 
on a rapidly changing table of figures on the ship's computer display. 
For the length of time he had in mind, the question of power 
consumption became significant. He didn't want a murder on his 
conscience. 
"At the third stroke it will be one... thirty`two... and forty seconds. 
"Beep... beep... beep." 
He checked around the small ship. He walked down the short 
corridor. "At the third stroke..." 
He stuck his head into the small, functional, gleaming steel 
bathroom. 
"it will be..." 
It sounded fine in there. 
He looked into the tiny sleeping quarters. 
"... one... thirty`two..." 
It sounded a bit muffled. There was a towel hanging over one of 
the speakers. He took down the towel. 
"... and fifty seconds." 
Fine. 
He checked out the packed cargo hold, and wasn't at all satisfied 
with the sound. There was altogether too much crated junk in the 
way. He stepped back out and waited for the door to seal. He broke 
open a closed control panel and pushed the jettison button. He didn't 
know why he hadn't thought of that before. A whooshing rumbling 
noise died away quickly into silence. After a pause a slight hiss could 
be heard again. 
It stopped. 
He waited for the green light to show and then opened the door 
again on the now empty cargo hold. 
"... one... thirty`three... and fifty seconds." 
Very nice. 
"Beep... beep... beep." 
He then went and had a last thorough examination of the 
emergency suspended animation chamber, which was where he 
particularly wanted it to be heard. 
"At the third stroke it will be one... thirty... four... precisely." 
He shivered as he peered down through the heavily frosted 
covering at the dim bulk of the form within. One day, who knew when, 
it would wake, and when it did, it would know what time it was. Not 
exactly local time, true, but what the heck. 
He double`checked the computer display above the freezer bed, 
dimmed the lights and checked it again. 
"At the third stroke it will be..." 
He tiptoed out and returned to the control cabin. 
"... one... thirty`four and twenty seconds." 
The voice sounded as clear as if he was hearing it over a phone in 
London, which he wasn't, not by a long way. 
He gazed out into the inky night. The star the size of a brilliant 
biscuit crumb he could see in the distance was Zondostina, or as it 
was known on the world from which the rather stilted, sing`song 
voice was being received, Pleiades Zeta. 
The bright orange curve that filled over half the visible area was the 
giant gas planet Sesefras Magna, where the Xaxisian battleships 
docked, and just rising over its horizon was a small cool blue moon, 
Epun. 
"At the third stroke it will be..." 
For twenty minutes he sat and watched as the gap between the 
ship and Epun closed, as the ship's computer teased and kneaded the 
numbers that would bring it into a loop around the little moon, close 
the loop and keep it there, orbiting in perpetual obscurity. 
"One... fifty`nine..." 
His original plan had been to close down all external signalling and 
radiation from the ship, to render it as nearly invisible as possible 
unless you were actually looking at it, but then he'd had an idea he 
preferred. It would now emit one single continuous beam, pencil`thin, 
broadcasting the incoming time signal to the planet of the signal's 
origin, which it would not reach for four hundred years, travelling at 
light speed, but where it would probably cause something of a stir 
when it did. 
"Beep... beep... beep." 
He sniggered. 
He didn't like to think of himself as the sort of person who giggled 
or sniggered, but he had to admit that he had been giggling and 
sniggering almost continuously for well over half an hour now. 
"At the third stroke..." 
The ship was now locked almost perfectly into its perpetual orbit 
round a little known and never visited moon. Almost perfect. 
One thing only remained. He ran again the computer simulation of 
the launching of the ship's little Escape`O`Buggy, balancing actions, 
reactions, tangential forces, all the mathematical poetry of motion, 
and saw that it was good. 
Before he left, he turned out the lights. 
As his tiny little cigar tube of an escape craft zipped out on the 
beginning of its three`day journey to the orbiting space station Port 
Sesefron, it rode for a few seconds a long pencil`thin beam of 
radiation that was starting out on a longer journey still. 
"At the third stroke, it will be two... thirteen... and fifty seconds." 
He giggled and sniggered. He would have laughed out loud but he 
didn't have the room. 
"Beep... beep... beep." 
Chapter 11
"April showers I hate especially." 
However noncommittally Arthur grunted, the man seemed 
determined to talk to him. He wondered if he should get up and move 
to another table, but there didn't seem to be one free in the whole 
cafeteria. He stirred his coffee fiercely. 
"Bloody April showers. Hate hate hate." 
Arthur stared, frowning, out of the window. A light, sunny spray of 
rain hung over the motorway. Two months he'd been back now. 
Slipping back into his old life had in fact been laughably easy. People 
had such extraordinarily short memories, including him. Eight years of 
crazed wanderings round the Galaxy now seemed to him not so much 
like a bad dream as like a film he had videotaped from the tv and now 
kept in the back of a cupboard without bothering to watch. 
One effect that still lingered though, was his joy at being back. Now 
that the Earth's atmosphere had closed over his head for good, he 
thought, wrongly, everything within it gave him extraordinary 
pleasure. Looking at the silvery sparkle of the raindrops he felt he had 
to protest. 
"Well, I like them," he said suddenly, "and for all the obvious 
reasons. They're light and refreshing. They sparkle and make you feel 
good." 
The man snorted derisively. 
"That's what they all say," he said, and glowered darkly from his 
corner seat. 
He was a lorry driver. Arthur knew this because his opening, 
unprovoked remark had been, "I'm a lorry driver. I hate driving in the 
rain. Ironic isn't it? Bloody ironic." 
If there was a sequitur hidden in this remark, Arthur had not been 
able to divine it and had merely given a little grunt, affable but not 
encouraging. 
But the man had not been deterred then, and was not deterred 
now. "They all say that about bloody April showers," he said. "So 
bloody nice, so bloody refreshing, such charming bloody weather." 
He leaned forward, screwing his face up as if he was going to say 
something about the government. 
"What I want to know is this," he said, "if it's going to be nice 
weather, why," he almost spat, "can't it be nice without bloody 
raining?" 
Arthur gave up. He decided to leave his coffee, which was too hot 
to drink quickly and too nasty to drink cold. 
"Well, there you go," he said and instead got up himself. "Bye." 
He stopped off at the service station shop, then walked back 
through the car park, making a point of enjoying the fine play of rain 
on his face. There was even, he noticed, a faint rainbow glistening 
over the Devon hills. He enjoyed that too. 
He climbed into his battered but adored old black Golf GTi, 
squealed the tyres, and headed out past the islands of petrol pumps 
and on to the slip road back towards the motorway. 
He was wrong in thinking that the atmosphere of the Earth had 
closed finally and for ever above his head. 
He was wrong to think that it would ever be possible to put behind 
him the tangled web of irresolutions into which his galactic travels 
had dragged him. 
He was wrong to think he could now forget that the big, hard, oily, 
dirty, rainbow`hung Earth on which he lived was a microscopic dot on 
a microscopic dot lost in the unimaginable infinity of the Universe. 
He drove on, humming, being wrong about all these things. 
The reason he was wrong was standing by the slip road under a 
small umbrella. 
His jaw sagged. He sprained his ankle against the brake pedal and 
skidded so hard he very nearly turned the car over. 
"Fenny " he shouted. 
Having narrowly avoided hitting her with the actual car, he hit her 
instead with the car door as he leant across and flung it open at her. 
It caught her hand and knocked away her umbrella, which then 
bowled wildly away across the road. 
"Shit " yelled Arthur as helpfully as he cold, leapt out of his own 
door, narrowly avoided being run down by McKeena's All`Weather 
Haulage, and watched in horror as it ran down Fenny's umbrella 
instead. The lorry swept along the motorway and away. 
The umbrella lay like a recently swatted daddy`long`legs, expiring 
sadly on the ground. Tiny gusts of wind made it twitch a little. 
He picked it up. 
"Er," he said. There didn't seem to be a lot of point in offering the 
thing back to her. 
"How did you know my name?" she said. 
"Er, well," he said. "Look, I'll get you another one..." 
He looked at her and tailed off. 
She was tallish with dark hair which fell in waves around a pale and 
serious face. Standing still, alone, she seemed almost sombre, like a 
statue to some important but unpopular virtue in a formal garden. 
She seemed to be looking at something other than what she looked 
as if she was looking at. 
But when she smiled, as she did now, it was as if she suddenly 
arrived from somewhere. Warmth and life flooded into her face, and 
impossibly graceful movement into her body. The effect was very 
disconcerting, and it disconcerted Arthur like hell. 
She grinned, tossed her bag into the back and swivelled herself into 
the front seat. 
"Don't worry about the umbrella," she said to him as she climbed 
in. "It was my brother's and he can't have liked it or he wouldn't have 
given it to me." She laughed and pulled on her seatbelt. "You're not a 
friend of my brother's are you?" 
"No." 
Her voice was the only part of her which didn't say "Good". 
Her physical presence there in the car, his car, was quite 
extraordinary to Arthur. He felt, as he let the car pull slowly away, 
that he could hardly think or breathe, and hoped that neither of these 
functions were vital to his driving or they were in trouble. 
So what he had experienced in the other car, her brother's car, the 
night he had returned exhausted and bewildered from his nightmare 
years in the stars had not been the unbalance of the moment, or, if it 
had been, he was at least twice as unbalanced now, and quite liable 
to fall off whatever it is that well`balanced people are supposed to be 
balancing on. 
"So..." he said, hoping to kick the conversation off to an exciting 
start. 
"He was meant to pick me up ʹ my brother ʹ but phoned to say he 
couldn't make it. I asked about buses but the man started to look at 
the calendar rather than a timetable, so I decided to hitch. So." 
"So." 
"So here I am. And what I would like to know, is how you know my 
name." 
"Perhaps we ought to first sort out," said Arthur, looking back over 
his shoulder as he eased his car into the motorway traffic, "where I'm 
taking you." 
Very close, he hoped, or long away. Close would mean she lived 
near him, a long way would mean he could drive her there. 
"I'd like to go to Taunton," she said, "please. If that's all right. It's 
not far. You can drop me at..." 
"You live in Taunton?" he said, hoping that he'd managed to sound 
merely curious rather than ecstatic. Taunton was wonderfully close to 
him. He could... 
"No, London," she said. "There's a train in just under an hour." 
It was the worst thing possible. Taunton was only minutes away up 
the motorway. He wondered what to do, and while he was wondering 
with horror heard himself saying, "Oh, I can take you to London. Let 
me take you to London..." 
Bungling idiot. Why on Earth had he said "let" in that stupid way? 
He was behaving like a twelve`year`old. 
"Are you going to London?" she asked. 
"I wasn't," he said, "but..." Bungling idiot. 
"It's very kind of you," she said, "but really no. I like to go by train." 
And suddenly she was gone. Or rather, that part of her which brought 
her to life was gone. She looked rather distantly out of the window 
and hummed lightly to herself. 
He couldn't believe it. 
Thirty seconds into the conversation, and already he'd blown it. 
Grown men, he told himself, in flat contradiction of centuries of 
accumulated evidence about the way grown men behave, do not 
behave like this. 
Taunton 5 miles, said the signpost. 
He gripped the steering wheel so tightly the car wobbled. He was 
going to have to do something dramatic. 
"Fenny," he said. 
She glanced round sharply at him. 
"You still haven't told me how..." 
"Listen," said Arthur, "I will tell you, though the story is rather 
strange. Very strange." 
She was still looking at him, but said nothing. 
"Listen..." 
"You said that." 
"Did I? Oh. There are things I must talk to you about, and things I 
must tell you... a story I must tell you which would..." He was 
thrashing about. He wanted something along the lines of "Thy 
knotted and combined locks to part, and each particular quill to stand 
on end like quills upon the fretful porpentine" but didn't think he 
could carry it off and didn't like the hedgehog reference. 
"... which would take more than five miles," he settled for in the 
end, rather lamely he was afraid. 
"Well..." 
"Just supposing," he said, "just supposing" ʹ he didn't know what 
was coming next, so he thought he'd just sit back and listen ʹ "that 
there was some extraordinary way in which you were very important 
to me, and that, though you didn't know it, I was very important to 
you, but it all went for nothing because we only had five miles and I 
was a stupid idiot at knowing how to say something very important to 
someone I've only just met and not crash into lorries at the same time, 
what would you say..." he paused helplessly, and looked at her, "I... 
should do?" 
"Watch the road " she yelped. 
"Shit " 
He narrowly avoided careering into the side of a hundred Italian 
washing machines in a German lorry. 
"I think," she said, with a momentary sigh of relief, "you should buy
me a drink before my train goes." 
Chapter 12
There is, for some reason, something especially grim about pubs 
near stations, a very particular kind of grubbiness, a special kind of 
pallor to the pork pies. 
Worse than the pork pies, though, are the sandwiches. 
There is a feeling which persists in England that making a sandwich 
interesting, attractive, or in any way pleasant to eat is something 
sinful that only foreigners do. 
"Make 'em dry," is the instruction buried somewhere in the 
collective national consciousness, "make 'em rubbery. If you have to 
keep the buggers fresh, do it by washing 'em once a week." 
It is by eating sandwiches in pubs on Saturday lunchtimes that the 
British seek to atone for whatever their national sins have been. 
They're not altogether clear what those sins are, and don't want to 
know either. Sins are not the sort of things one wants to know about. 
But whatever their sins are they are amply atoned for by the 
sandwiches they make themselves eat. 
If there is anything worse than the sandwiches, it is the sausages 
which sit next to them. Joyless tubes, full of gristle, floating in a sea of 
something hot and sad, stuck with a plastic pin in the shape of a chef's 
hat: a memorial, one feels, for some chef who hated the world, and 
died, forgotten and alone among his cats on a back stair in Stepney. 
The sausages are for the ones who know what their sins are and 
wish to atone for something specific. 
"There must be somewhere better," said Arthur. 
"No time," said Fenny, glancing at her watch. "My train leaves in 
half an hour." 
They sat at a small wobbly table. On it were some dirty glasses, and 
some soggy beermats with jokes printed on them. Arthur got Fenny a 
tomato juice, and himself a pint of yellow water with gas in it. And a 
couple of sausages. He didn't know why. He bought them for 
something to do while the gas settled in his glass. 
The barman dunked Arthur's change in a pool of beer on the bar, 
for which Arthur thanked him. 
"All right," said Fenny, glancing at her watch, "tell me what it is you 
have to tell me." 
She sounded, as well she might, extremely sceptical, and Arthur's 
heart sank. Hardly, he felt, the most conductive setting to try to 
explain to her as she sat there, suddenly cool and defensive, that in a 
sort of out`of`body dream he had had a telepathic sense that the 
mental breakdown she had suffered had been connected with the 
fact that, appearances to the contrary nonwithstanding, the Earth had 
been demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass, 
something which he alone on Earth knew anything about, having 
virtually witnessed it from a Vogon spaceship, and that furthermore 
both his body and soul ached for her unbearably and he needed to 
got to bed with her as soon as was humanly possible. 
"Fenny," he started. 
"I wonder if you'd like to buy some tickets for our raffle? It's just a 
little one." 
He glanced up sharply. 
"To raise money for Anjie who's retiring." 
"What?" 
"And needs a kidney machine." 
He was being leant over by a rather stiffly slim middle`aged woman 
with a prim knitted suit and a prim little perm, and a prim little smile 
that probably got licked by prim little dogs a lot. 
She was holding out a small book of cloakroom tickets and a 
collecting tin. 
"Only ten pence each," she said, "so you could probably even buy 
two. Without breaking the bank " She gave a tinkly little laugh and 
then a curiously long sigh. Saying "Without breaking the bank" had 
obviously given her more pleasure than anything since some GIs had 
been billeted on her in the war. 
"Er, yes, all right," said Arthur, hurriedly digging in his pocket and 
producing a couple of coins. 
With infuriating slowness, and prim theatricality, if there was such 
a thing, the woman tore off two tickets and handed them to Arthur. 
"I do hope you win," she said with a smile that suddenly snapped 
together like a piece of advanced origami, "the prizes are so nice." 
"Yes, thank you," said Arthur, pocketing the tickets rather 
brusquely and glancing at his watch. 
He turned towards Fenny. 
So did the woman with the raffle tickets. 
"And what about you, young lady?" she said. "It's for Anjie's kidney 
machine. She's retiring you see. Yes?" She hoisted the little smile even 
further up her face. She would have to stop and let it go soon or the 
skin would surely split. 
"Er, look, here you are," said Arthur, and pushed a fifty pence piece 
at her in the hope that that would see her off. 
"Oh, we are in the money, aren't we?" said the woman, with a long 
smiling sigh. "Down from London are we?" 
"No, that's all right, really," he said with a wave of his hand, and 
she started with an awful deliberation to peel off five tickets, one by 
one. 
"Oh, but you must have your tickets," insisted the woman, "or you 
won't be able to claim your prize. They're very nice prizes, you know. 
Very suitable." 
Arthur snatched the tickets, and said thank you as sharply as he 
could. 
The woman turned to Fenny once again. 
"And now, what about..." 
"No " Arthur nearly yelled. "These are for her," he explained, 
brandishing the five new tickets. 
"Oh, I see  How nice " 
She smiled sickeningly at both of them. 
"Well, I do hope you..." 
"Yes," snapped Arthur, "thank you." 
The woman finally departed to the table next to theirs. Arthur 
turned desperately to Fenny, and was relieved to see that she was 
rocking with silent laughter. 
He sighed and smiled. 
"Where were we?" 
"You were calling me Fenny, and I was about to ask you not to." 
"What do you mean?" 
She twirled the little wooden cocktail stick in her tomato juice. 
"It's why I asked if you were a friend of my brother's. Or half`
brother really. He's the only one who calls me Fenny, and I'm not fond 
of him for it." 
"So what's...?" 
"Fenchurch." 
"What?" 
"Fenchurch." 
"Fenchurch." 
She looked at him sternly. 
"Yes," she said, "and I'm watching you like a lynx to see if you're 
going to ask the same silly question that everybody asks me until I 
want to scream. I shall be cross and disappointed if you do. Plus I shall 
scream. So watch it." 
She smiled, shook her hair a little forward over her face and peered 
at him from behind it. 
"Oh," he said, "that's a little unfair, isn't it?" 
"Yes." 
"Fine." 
"All right," she said with a laugh, "you can ask me. Might as well get 
it over with. Better than have you call me Fenny all the time." 
"Presumably..." said Arthur. 
"We've only got two tickets left, you see, and since you were so 
generous when I spoke to you before..." 
"What?" snapped Arthur. 
The woman with the perm and the smile and the now nearly empty 
book of cloakroom tickets was now waving the two last ones under 
his nose. 
"I thought I'd give the opportunity to you, because the prizes are so 
nice." 
She wrinkled up he nose a little confidentially. 
"Very tasteful. I know you'll like them. And it is for Anjie's 
retirement present you see. We want to give her..." 
"A kidney machine, yes," said Arthur. "Here." 
He held out two more ten pence pieces to her, and took the tickets. 
A thought seemed to strike the woman. It struck her very slowly. 
You could watch it coming in like a long wave on a sandy beach. 
"Oh dear," she said, "I'm not interrupting anything am I?" 
She peered anxiously at both of them. 
"No it's fine," said Arthur. Everything that could possibly be fine," 
he insisted, "is fine. 
"Thank you," he added. 
"I say," she said, in a delightful ecstacy of worry, "you're not ... in 
love, are you?" 
"It's very hard to say," said Arthur. "We haven't had a chance to 
talk yet." 
He glanced at Fenchurch. She was grinning. 
The woman nodded with knowing confidentiality. 
"I'll let you see the prizes in a minute," she said, and left. 
Arthur turned, with a sigh, back to the girl that he found it hard to 
say whether he was in love with. 
"You were about to ask me," she said, "a question." 
"Yes," said Arthur. 
"We can do it together if you like," said Fenchurch. "Was I 
found ..." 
"... in a handbag..." joined in Arthur. 
"... in the Left Luggage Office..." they said together. 
"... at Fenchurch street station," they finished. 
"And the answer," said Fenchurch, "is no." 
"Fine," said Arthur. 
"I was conceived there." 
"What?" 
"I was con ʹ " 
"In the Left Luggage Office?" hooted Arthur. 
"No, of course not. Don't be silly. What would my parents be doing 
in the Left Luggage Office?" she said, rather taken aback by the 
suggestion. 
"Well, I don't know," spluttered Arthur, "or rather..." 
"It was in the ticket queue." 
"The..." 
"The ticket queue. Or so they claim. They refuse to elaborate. They 
only say you wouldn't believe how bored it is possible to get in the 
ticket queue at Fenchurch Street Station." 
She sipped demurely at her tomato juice and looked at her watch. 
Arthur continued to gurgle for a moment or two. 
"I'm going to have to go in a minute or two," said Fenchurch, "and 
you haven't begun to tell me whatever this terrifically extraordinary 
thing is that you were so keen to get off your chest." 
"Why don't you let me drive you to London?" said Arthur. "It's 
Saturday, I've got nothing particular to do, I'd..." 
"No," said Fenchurch, "thank you, it's sweet of you, but no. I need 
to be by myself for a couple of days." She smiled and shrugged. 
"But..." 
"You can tell me another time. I'll give you my number." 
Arthur's heart went boom boom churn churn as she scribbled 
seven figures in pencil on a scrap of paper and handed it to him. 
"Now we can relax," she said with a slow smile which filled Arthur 
till he thought he would burst. 
"Fenchurch," he said, enjoying the name as he said it. "I ʹ " 
"A box," said a trailing voice, "of cherry liqueurs, and also, and I 
know you'll like this, a gramophone record of Scottish bagpipe 
music..." 
"Yes thank you, very nice," insisted Arthur. 
"I just thought I'd let you have a look at them," said the permed 
woman, "as you're down from London..." 
She was holding them out proudly for Arthur too see. He could see 
that they were indeed a box of cherry brandy liqueurs and a record of 
bagpipe music. That was what they were. 
"I'll let you have your drink in peace now," she said, patting Arthur 
lightly on his seething shoulder, "but I knew you'd like to see." 
Arthur re`engaged his eyes with Fenchurch's once again, and 
suddenly was at a loss for something to say. A moment had come and 
gone between the two of them, but the whole rhythm of it had been 
wrecked by that stupid, blasted woman. 
"Don't worry," said Fenchurch, looking at him steadily from over 
the top of her glass, "we will talk again." She took a sip. 
"Perhaps," she added, "it wouldn't have gone so well if it wasn't for 
her." She gave a wry little smile and dropped her hair forward over 
her face again.
It was perfectly true. 
He had to admit it was perfectly true. 
Chapter 13
That night, at home, as he was prancing round the house 
pretending to be tripping through cornfields in slow motion and 
continually exploding with sudden laughter, Arthur thought he could 
even bear to listen to the album of bagpipe music he had won. It was 
eight o'clock and he decided he would make himself, force himself, to 
listen to the whole record before he phoned her. Maybe he should 
even leave it till tomorrow. That would be the cool thing to do. Or 
next week sometime. 
No. No games. He wanted her and didn't care who knew it. He 
definitely and absolutely wanted her, adored her, longed for her, 
wanted to do more things than there were names for with her. 
He actually caught himself saying thinks like "Yippee" as he prances 
ridiculously round the house. Her eyes, her hair, her voice, 
everything... 
He stopped. 
He would put on the record of bagpipe music. Then he would call 
her. 
Would he, perhaps, call her first? 
No. What he would do was this. He would put on the record of 
bagpipe music. He would listen to it, every last banshee wail of it. 
Then he would call her. That was the correct order. That was what he 
would do. 
He was worried about touching things in case they blew up when 
he did so. 
He picked up the record. It failed to blow up. He slipped it out of its 
cover. He opened the record player, he turned on the amp. They both 
survived. He giggled foolishly as he lowered the stylus on to the disc. 
He sat and listened solemnly to "A Scottish Soldier". 
He listened to "Amazing Grace". 
He listened to something about some glen or other. 
He thought about his miraculous lunchtime. 
They had just been on the point of leaving, when they were 
distracted by an awful outbreak of "yoo`hooing". The appallingly 
permed woman was waving to them across the room like some stupid 
bird with a broken wing. Everyone in the pub turned to them and 
seemed to be expecting some sort of response. 
They hadn't listened to the bit about how pleased and happy Anjie 
was going to be about the 4.30p everyone had helped to raise 
towards the cost of her kidney machine, had been vaguely aware that 
someone from the next table had won a box of cherry brandy liqueurs, 
and took a moment or two to cotton on to the fact that the yoo`
hooing lady was trying to ask them if they had ticket number 37. 
Arthur discovered that he had. He glanced angrily at his watch. 
Fenchurch gave him a push. 
"Go on," she said, "go and get it. Don't be bad tempered. Give 
them a nice speech about how pleased you are and you can give me a 
call and tell me how it went. I'll want to hear the record. Go on." 
She flicked his arm and left. 
The regulars thought his acceptance speech a little over`effusive. It 
was, after all, merely an album of bagpipe music. 
Arthur thought about it, and listened to the music, and kept on 
breaking into laughter. 
Chapter 14
Ring ring. 
Ring ring. 
Ring ring. 
"Hello, yes? Yes, that's right. Yes. You'll 'ave to speak up, there's an 
awful lot of noise in 'ere. What? 
"No, I only do the bar in the evenings. It's Yvonne who does lunch, 
and Jim, he's the landlord. No, I wasn't on. What? 
"You'll have to speak up. 
"What? No, don't know anything about no raffle. What? 
"No, don't know nothing about it. 'Old on, I'll call Jim." 
The barmaid put her hand over the receiver and called over the 
noisy bar. 
"'Ere, Jim, bloke on the phone says something about he's won a 
raffle. He keeps on saying it's ticket 37 and he's won." 
"No, there was a guy in the pub here won," shouted back the 
barman. 
"He says 'ave we got the ticket." 
"Well how can he think he's won if he hasn't even got a ticket?" 
"Jim says 'ow can you think you've won if you 'aven't even got the 
ticket. What?" 
She put her hand over the receiver again. 
"Jim, 'e keeps effing and blinding at me. Says there's a number on 
the ticket." 
"Course there was a number on the ticket, it was a bloody raffle 
ticket wasn't it?" 
"'E says 'e means its a telephone number on the ticket." 
"Put the phone down and serve the bloody customers, will you?" 
Chapter 15
Eight hours West sat a man alone on a beach mourning an 
inexplicable loss. He could only think of his loss in little packets of 
grief at a time, because the whole thing was too great to be borne. 
He watched the long slow Pacific waves come in along the sand, 
and waited and waited for the nothing that he knew was about to 
happen. As the time came for it not to happen, it duly didn't happen 
and so the afternoon wore itself away and the sun dropped beneath 
the long line of sea, and the day was gone. 
The beach was a beach we shall not name, because his private 
house was there, but it was a small sandy stretch somewhere along 
the hundreds of miles of coastline that first runs west from Los 
Angeles, which is described in the new edition of the Hitchhiker's 
Guide to the Galaxy in one entry as "junky, wunky, lunky, stunky, and 
what's that other word, and all kinds of bad stuff, woo", and in 
another, written only hours later as "being like several thousand 
square miles of American Express junk mail, but without the same 
sense of moral depth. Plus the air is, for some reason, yellow." 
The coastline runs west, and then turns north up to the misty bay 
of San Francisco, which the Guide describes as a "good place to go. 
It's very easy to believe that everyone you meet there is also a space 
traveller. Starting a new religion for you is just their way of saying 'hi'. 
Until you've settled in and got the hang of the place it is best to say 
'no' to three questions out of any given four that anyone may ask you, 
because there are some very strange things going on there, some of 
which an unsuspecting alien could die of." The hundreds of curling 
miles of cliffs and sand, palm trees, breakers and sunsets are 
described in the Guide as "Boffo. A good one." 
And somewhere on this good boffo stretch of coastline lay the 
house of this inconsolable man, a man whom many regarded as being 
insane. But this was only, as he would tell people, because he was. 
One of the many reasons why people thought him insane was 
because of the peculiarity of his house which, even in a land where 
most people's houses were peculiar in one way or another, was quite 
extreme in his peculiarness. 
His house was called The Outside of the Asylum. 
His name was simply John Watson, though he preferred to be 
called ʹ and some of his friends had now reluctantly agreed to this ʹ
Wonko the Sane. 
In his house were a number of strange things, including a grey glass 
bowl with eight words engraved upon it. 
We can talk of him much later on ʹ this is just an interlude to watch 
the sun go down and to say that he was there watching it. 
He had lost everything he cared for, and was now simply waiting 
for the end of the world ʹ little realizing that it had already been and 
gone. 
Chapter 16
After a disgusting Sunday spent emptying rubbish bins behind a 
pub in Taunton, and finding nothing, no raffle ticket, no telephone 
number, Arthur tried everything he could to find Fenchurch, and the 
more things he tried, the more weeks passed. 
He raged and railed against himself, against fate, against the world 
and its weather. He even, in his sorrow and his fury, went and sat in 
the motorway service station cafeteria where he'd been just before 
he met her. 
"It's the drizzle that makes me particularly morose." 
"Please shut up about the drizzle," snapped Arthur. 
"I would shut up if it would shut up drizzling." 
"Look..." 
"But I'll tell you what it will do when it shuts up drizzling, shall I?" 
"No." 
"Blatter." 
"What?" 
"It will blatter." 
Arthur stared over the rim of his coffee cup at the grisly outside 
world. It was a completely pointless place to be, he realized, and he 
had been driven there by superstition rather than logic. However, as if 
to bait him with the knowledge that such coincidences could in fact 
happen, fate had chosen to reunite him with the lorry driver he had 
encountered there last time. 
The more he tried to ignore him, the more he found himself being 
dragged back into the gravitic whirlpool of the man's exasperating 
conversation. 
"I think," said Arthur vaguely, cursing himself for even bothering to 
say this, "that it's easing off." 
"Ha " 
Arthur just shrugged. He should go. That's what he should do. He 
should just go. 
"It never stops raining " ranted the lorry driver. He thumped the 
table, spilt his tea, and actually, for a moment, appeared to be 
steaming. 
You can't just walk off without responding to a remark like that. 
"Of course it stops raining," said Arthur. It was hardly an elegant 
refutation, but it had to be said. 
"It rains... all... the time," raved the man, thumping the table again, 
in time to the words. 
Arthur shook his head. 
"Stupid to say it rains all the time..." he said. 
The man's eyebrows shot up, affronted. 
"Stupid? Why's it stupid? Why's it stupid to say it rains all the time 
if it rains the whole time?" 
"Didn't rain yesterday." 
"Did in Darlington." 
Arthur paused, warily. 
"You going to ask me where I was yesterday?" asked the man. 
"Eh?" 
"No," said Arthur. 
"But I expect you can guess." 
"Do you." 
"Begins with a D." 
"Does it." 
"And it was pissing down there, I can tell you." 
"You don't want to sit there, mate," said a passing stranger in 
overalls to Arthur cheerily. "That's Thundercloud Corner that is. 
Reserved special for old Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head here. 
There's one reserved in every motorway caff between here and sunny 
Denmark. Steer clear is my advice. 'Swhat we all do. How's it going, 
Rob? Keeping busy? Got your wet`weather tyres on? Har har." 
He breezed by and went to tell a joke about Britt Ekland to 
someone at a nearby table. 
"See, none of them bastards take me seriously," said Rob McKeena. 
"But," he added darkly, leaning forward and screwing up his eyes, 
"they all know it's true " 
Arthur frowned. 
"Like my wife," hissed the sole owner and driver of McKeena's All`
Weather Haulage. "She says it's nonsense and I make a fuss and 
complain about nothing, but," he paused dramatically and darted out 
dangerous looks from his eyes, "she always brings the washing in 
when I phone to say I'm on me way home " He brandished his coffee 
spoon. "What do you make of that?" 
"Well..." 
"I have a book," he went on, "I have a book. A diary. Kept it for 
fifteen years. Shows every single place I've ever been. Every day. And 
also what the weather was like. And it was uniformly," he snarled, 
"'orrible. All over England, Scotland, Wales I been. All round the 
Continent, Italy, Germany, back and forth to Denmark, been to 
Yugoslavia. It's all marked in and charted. Even when I went to visit 
my brother," he added, "in Seattle." 
"Well," said Arthur, getting up to leave at last, "perhaps you'd 
better show it to someone." 
"I will," said Rob McKeena. 
And he did. 
Chapter 17
Misery, dejection. More misery and more dejection. He needed a 
project and he gave himself one. 
He would find where his cave had been. 
On prehistoric Earth he had lived in a cave, not a nice cave, a lousy 
cave, but... There was no but. It had been a totally lousy cave and he 
had hated it. But he had lived in it for five years which made it home 
of some kind, and a person likes to keep track of his homes. Arthur 
Dent was such a person and so he went to Exeter to buy a computer. 
That was what he really wanted, of course, a computer. But he felt 
he ought to have some serious purpose in mind before he simply 
went and lashed out a lot of readies on what people might otherwise 
mistake as being just a thing to play with. So that was his serious 
purpose. To pinpoint the exact location of a cave on prehistoric Earth. 
He explained this to the man in the shop. 
"Why?" said the man in the shop. 
This was a tricky one. 
"OK, skip that," said the man in the shop. "How?" 
"Well, I was hoping you could help me with that." 
The man sighed and his shoulders dropped. 
"Have you much experience of computers?" 
Arthur wondered whether to mention Eddie the shipboard 
computer on the Heart of Gold, who could have done the job in a 
second, or Deep Thought, or ʹ but decided he wouldn't. 
"No," he said. 
"Looks like a fun afternoon," said the man in the shop, but he said 
it only to himself. 
Arthur bought the Apple anyway. Over a few days he also acquired 
some astronomical software, plotted the movements of stars, drew 
rough little diagrams of how he seemed to remember the stars to 
have been in the sky when he looked up out of his cave at night, and 
worked away busily at it for weeks, cheerfully putting off the 
conclusion he knew he would inevitably have to come to, which was 
that the whole project was completely ludicrous. 
Rough drawings from memory were futile. He didn't even know 
how long it had been, beyond Ford Prefect's rough guess at the time 
that it was "a couple of million years" and he simply didn't have the 
maths. 
Still, in the end he worked out a method which would at least 
produce a result. He decided not to mind the fact that with the 
extraordinary jumble of rules of thumb, wild approximations and 
arcane guesswork he was using he would be lucky to hit the right 
galaxy, he just went ahead and got a result. 
He would call it the right result. Who would know? 
As it happened, through the myriad and unfathomable chances of 
fate, he got it exactly right, though he of course would never know 
that. He just went up to London and knocked on the appropriate door. 
"Oh. I thought you were going to phone me first." 
Arthur gaped in astonishment. 
"You can only come in for a few minutes," said Fenchurch. "I'm just 
going out." 
Chapter 18
A summer's day in Islington, full of the mournful wail of antique`
restoring machinery. 
Fenchurch was unavoidably busy for the afternoon, so Arthur 
wandered in a blissed`out haze and looked at all the shops which, in 
Islington, are quite an useful bunch, as anyone who regularly needs 
old woodworking tools, Boer War helmets, drag, office furniture or 
fish will readily confirm. 
The sun beat down over the roofgardens. It beat on architects and 
plumbers. It beat on barristers and burglars. It beat on pizzas. It beat 
on estate agent's particulars. 
It beat on Arthur as he went into a restored furniture shop. 
"It's an interesting building," said the proprietor, cheerfully. 
"There's a cellar with a secret passage which connects with a nearby 
pub. It was built for the Prince Regent apparently, so he could make 
his escape when he needed to." 
"You mean, in case anybody might catch him buying stripped pine 
furniture," said Arthur 
"No," said the proprietor, "not for that reason." 
"You'll have to excuse me," said Arthur. "I'm terribly happy." 
"I see." 
He wandered hazily on and found himself outside the offices of 
Greenpeace. He remembered the contents of his file marked "Things 
to do`urgent ", which he hadn't opened again in the meantime. He 
marched in with a cheery smile and said he'd come to give them some 
money to help free the dolphins. 
"Very funny," they told him, "go away." 
This wasn't quite the response he had expected, so he tried again. 
This time they got quite angry with him, so he just left some money 
anyway and went back out into the sunshine. 
Just after six he returned to Fenchurch's house in the alleyway, 
clutching a bottle of champagne. 
"Hold this," she said, shoved a stout rope in his hand and 
disappeared inside through the large white wooden doors from which 
dangled a fat padlock off a black iron bar. 
The house was a small converted stable in a light industrial 
alleyway behind the derelict Royal Agricultural Hall of Islington. As 
well as its large stable doors it also had a normal`looking front door of 
smartly glazed panelled wood with a black dolphin door knocker. The 
one odd thing about this door was its doorstep, which was nine feet 
high, since the door was set into the upper of the two floors and 
presumably had been originally used to haul in hay for hungry horses. 
An old pulley jutted out of the brickwork above the doorway and it 
was over this that the rope Arthur was holding was slung. The other 
end of the rope held a suspended 'cello. 
The door opened above his head. 
"OK," said Fenchurch, "pull on the rope, steady the 'cello. Pass it up 
to me." 
He pulled on the rope, he steadied the 'cello. 
"I can't pull on the rope again," he said, "without letting go of the 
'cello." 
Fenchurch leant down. 
"I'm steadying the 'cello," she said. "You pull on the rope." 
The 'cello eased up level with the doorway, swinging slightly, and 
Fenchurch manoeuvred it inside. 
"Come on up yourself," she called down. 
Arthur picked up his bag of goodies and went in through the stable 
doors, tingling. 
The bottom room, which he had seen briefly before, was pretty 
rough and full of junk. A large old cast`iron mangle stood there, a 
surprising number of kitchen sinks were piled in a corner. There was 
also, Arthur was momentarily alarmed to see, a pram, but it was very 
old and uncomplicatedly full of books. 
The floor was old stained concrete, excitingly cracked. And this was 
the measure of Arthur's mood as he stared up the rickety wooden 
steps in the far corner. Even a cracked concrete floor seemed to him 
an almost unbearably sensual thing. 
"An architect friend of mine keeps on telling me how he can do 
wonderful things with this place," said Fenchurch chattily as Arthur 
emerged through the floor. "He keeps on coming round, standing in 
stunned amazement muttering about space and objects and events 
and marvellous qualities of light, then says he needs a pencil and 
disappears for weeks. Wonderful things have, therefore, so far failed 
to happen to it." 
In fact, thought Arthur as he looked about, the upper room was at 
least reasonably wonderful anyway. It was simply decorated, 
furnished with things made out of cushions and also a stereo set with 
speakers which would have impressed the guys who put up 
Stonehenge. 
There were flowers which were pale and pictures which were 
interesting. 
There was a sort of gallery structure in the roof space which held a 
bed and also a bathroom which, Fenchurch explained, you could 
actually swing a cat in. "But," she added, "only if it was a reasonably 
patient cat and didn't mind a few nasty cracks about the head. So. 
Here you are." 
"Yes." 
They looked at each other for a moment. 
The moment became a longer moment, and suddenly it was a very 
long moment, so long one could hardly tell where all the time was 
coming from. 
For Arthur, who could usually contrive to feel self`conscious if left 
alone for long enough with a Swiss Cheese plant, the moment was 
one of sustained revelation. He felt on the sudden like a cramped and 
zoo`born animal who awakes one morning to find the door to his cage 
hanging quietly open and the savannah stretching grey and pink to 
the distant rising sun, while all around new sounds are waking. 
He wondered what the new sounds were as he gazed at her openly 
wondering face and her eyes that smiled with a shared surprise. 
He hadn't realized that life speaks with a voice to you, a voice that 
brings you answers to the questions you continually ask of it, had 
never consciously detected it or recognized its tones till it now said 
something it had never said to him before, which was "Yes". 
Fenchurch dropped her eyes away at last, with a tiny shake of her 
head. 
"I know," she said. "I shall have to remember," she added, "that 
you are the sort of person who cannot hold on to a simple piece of 
paper for two minutes without winning a raffle with it." 
She turned away. 
"Let's go for a walk," she said quickly. "Hyde Park. I'll change into 
something less suitable." 
She was dressed in a rather severe dark dress, not a particularly 
shapely one, and it didn't really suit her. 
"I wear it specially for my 'cello teacher," she said. "He's a nice boy, 
but I sometimes think all that bowing gets him a bit excited. I'll be 
down in a moment." 
She ran lightly up the steps to the gallery above, and called down, 
"Put the bottle in the fridge for later." 
He noticed as he slipped the champagne bottle into the door that it 
had an identical twin to sit next to. 
He walked over to the window and looked out. He turned and 
started to look at her records. From above he heard the rustle of her 
dress fall to the ground. He talked to himself about the sort of person 
he was. He told himself very firmly that for this moment at least he 
would keep his eyes very firmly and steadfastly locked on to the 
spines of her records, read the titles, nod appreciatively, count the 
blasted things if he had to. He would keep his head down. 
This he completely, utterly and abjectly failed to do. 
She was staring down at him with such intensity that she seemed 
hardly to notice that he was looking up at her. Then suddenly she 
shook her head, dropped the light sundress over herself and 
disappeared quickly into the bathroom. 
She emerged a moment later, all smiles and with a sunhat and 
came tripping down the steps with extraordinary lightness. It was a 
strange kind of dancing motion she had. She saw that he noticed it 
and put her head slightly on one side. 
"Like it?" she said. 
"You look gorgeous," he said simply, because she did. 
"Hmmmm," she said, as if he hadn't really answered her question. 
She closed the upstairs front door which had stood open all this 
time, and looked around the little room to see that it was all in a fit 
state to be left on its own for a while. Arthur's eyes followed hers 
around, and while he was looking in the other direction she slipped 
something out of a drawer and into the canvas bag she was carrying. 
Arthur looked back at her. 
"Ready?" 
"Did you know," she said with a slightly puzzled smile, "that there's 
something wrong with me?" 
Her directness caught Arthur unprepared. 
"Well," he said, "I'd heard some vague sort of..." 
"I wonder how much you do know about me," she said. "I you 
heard it from where I think you heard then that's not it. Russell just 
sort of makes stuff up, because he can't deal with what it really is." 
A pang of worry went through Arthur. 
"Then what is it?" he said. "Can you tell me?" 
"Don't worry," she said, "it's nothing bad at all. Just unusual. Very 
very unusual." 
She touched his hand, and then leant forward and kissed him 
briefly. 
"I shall be very interested to know," she said, "if you manage to 
work out what it is this evening." 
Arthur felt that if someone tapped him at that point he would have 
chimed, like the deep sustained rolling chime his grey fishbowl made 
when he flicked it with his thumbnail. 
Chapter 19
Ford Prefect was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound 
of gunfire. 
He slid himself out of the maintenance hatchway which he had 
fashioned into a bunk for himself by disabling some of the noisier 
machinery in his vicinity and padding it with towels. He slung himself 
down the access ladder and prowled the corridors moodily. 
They were claustrophobic and ill`lit, and what light there was 
continually flickering and dimming as power surged this way and that 
through the ship, causing heavy vibrations and rasping humming 
noises. 
That wasn't it, though. 
He paused and leaned back against the wall as something that 
looked like a small silver power drill flew past him down the dim 
corridor with a nasty searing screech. 
That wasn't it either. 
He clambered listlessly through a bulkhead door and found himself 
in a larger corridor, though still ill`lit. 
The ship lurched. It had been doing this a fair bit, but this was 
heavier. A small platoon of robots weent by making a terrible 
clattering. 
Still not it, though. 
Acrid smoke was drifting up from one end of the corridor, so he 
walked along it in the other direction. 
He passed a series of observation monitors let into the walls 
behind plates of toughened but still badly scratched perspex. 
One of them showed some horrible green scaly reptilian figure 
ranting and raving about the Single Transferable Vote system. It was 
hard to tell whether he was for or against it, but he clearly felt very 
strongly about it. Ford turned the sound down. 
That wasn't it, though. 
He passed another monitor. It was showing a commercial for some 
brand of toothpaste that would apparently make you feel free if you 
used it. There was nasty blaring music with it too, but that wasn't it. 
He came upon another, much larger three`dimensional screen that 
was monitoring the outside of the vast silver Xaxisian ship. 
As he watched, a thousand horribly beweaponed Zirzla robot 
starcruisers came searing round the dark shadow of a moon, 
silhouetted against the blinding disc of the star Xaxis, and the ship
simultaneously unleashed a vicious blaze of hideously 
incomprehensible forces from all its orifices against them. 
That was it. 
Ford shook his head irritably and rubbed his eyes. He slumped on 
the wrecked body of a dull silver robot which clearly had been 
burning earlier on, but had now cooled down enough to sit on. 
He yawned and dug his copy of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy 
out of his satchel. He activated the screen, and flicked idly through 
some level three entries and some level four entries. He was looking 
for some good insomnia cures. He found REST, which was what he 
reckoned he needed. He found REST AND RECUPERATION and was 
about to pass on when he suddenly had a better idea. He looked up at 
the monitor screen. The battle was raging more fiercely every second 
and the noise was appalling. The ship juddered, screamed, and 
lurched as each new bolt of stunning energy was delivered or 
received. 
He looked back down at the Guide again and flipped through a few 
likely locations. He suddenly laughed, and then rummaged in his 
satchel again. 
He pulled out a small memory dump module, wiped off the fluff 
and biscuit crumbs, and plugged it into an interface on the back of the 
Guide. 
When all the information that he could think was relevant had 
been dumped into the module, he unplugged it again, tossed it lightly 
in the palm of his hand, put the Guide away in his satchel, smirked, 
and went in search of the ship's computer data banks. 
Chapter 20
"The purpose of having the sun go low in the evenings, in the 
summer, especially in parks," said the voice earnestly, "is to make 
girl's breasts bob up and down more clearly to the eye. I am 
convinced that this is the case." 
Arthur and Fenchurch giggled about this to each other as they 
passed. She hugged him more tightly for a moment. 
"And I am certain," said the frizzy ginger`haired youth with the long 
thin nose who was epostulating from his deckchair by the side of the 
Serpentine, "that if one worked the argument through, one would 
find that it flowed with perfect naturalness and logic from 
everything," he insisted to his thin dark`haired companion who was 
slumped in the next door deckchair feeling dejected about his spots, 
"that Darwin was going on about. This is certain. This is indisputable. 
And," he added, "I love it." 
He turned sharply and squinted through his spectacles at 
Fenchurch. Arthur steered her away and could feel her silently 
quaking. 
"Next guess," she said, when she had stopped giggling, "come on." 
"All right," he said, "your elbow. Your left elbow. There's something 
wrong with your left elbow." 
"Wrong again," she said, "completely wrong. You're on completely 
the wrong track." 
The summer sun was sinking through the tress in the park, looking 
as if ʹ Let's not mince words. Hyde Park is stunning. Everything about 
it is stunning except for the rubbish on Monday mornings. Even the 
ducks are stunning. Anyone who can go through Hyde Park on a 
summer's evening and not feel moved by it is probably going through 
in an ambulance with the sheet pulled over their face. 
It is a park in which people do more extraordinary things than they 
do elsewhere. Arthur and Fenchurch found a man in shorts practising 
the bagpipes to himself under a tree. The piper paused to chase off an 
American couple who had tried, timidly to put some coins on the box 
his bagpipes came in. 
"No " he shouted at them, "go away  I'm only practising." 
He started resolutely to reinflate his bag, but even the noise this 
made could not disfigure their mood. 
Arthur put his arms around her and moved them slowly 
downwards. 
"I don't think it can be your bottom," he said after a while," there 
doesn't seem to be anything wrong with that at all." 
"Yes," she agreed, "there's absolutely nothing wrong with my 
bottom." 
They kissed for so long that eventually the piper went and 
practised on the other side of the tree. 
"I'll tell you a story," said Arthur. 
"Good."
They found a patch of grass which was relatively free of couples 
actually lying on top of each other and sat and watched the stunning 
ducks and the low sunlight rippling on the water which ran beneath 
the stunning ducks. 
"A story," said Fenchurch, cuddling his arm to her. 
"Which will tell you something of the sort of things that happen to 
me. It's absolutely true." 
"You know sometimes people tell you stories that are supposed to 
be something that happened to their wife's cousin's best friend, but 
actually probably got made up somewhere along the line." 
"Well, it's like one of those stories, except that it actually happened, 
and I know it actually happened, because the person it actually 
happened to was me." 
"Like the raffle ticket." 
Arthur laughed. "Yes. I had a train to catch," he went on. "I arrived 
at the station..." 
"Did I ever tell you," interrupted Fenchurch, "what happened to my 
parents in a station?" 
"Yes," said Arthur, "you did." 
"Just checking." 
Arthur glanced at his watch. "I suppose we could think of getting 
back," he said. 
"Tell me the story," said Fenchurch firmly. "You arrived at the 
station." 
"I was about twenty minutes early. I'd got the time of the train 
wrong. I suppose it is at least equally possible," he added after a 
moment's reflection, "that British Rail had got the time of the train 
wrong. Hadn't occurred to me before." 
"Get on with it." Fenchurch laughed. 
"So I bought a newspaper, to do the crossword, and went to the 
buffet to get a cup of coffee." 
"You do the crossword?" 
"Yes." 
"Which one?" 
"The Guardian usually." 
"I think it tries to be too cute. I prefer the Times. Did you solve it?" 
"What?" 
"The crossword in The Guardian." 
"I haven't had a chance to look at it yet," said Arthur, "I'm still 
trying to buy the coffee." 
"All right then. Buy the coffee." 
"I'm buying it. I am also," said Arthur, "buying some biscuits." 
"What sort?" 
"Rich Tea." 
"Good choice." 
"I like them. Laden with all these new possessions, I go and sit at a 
table. And don't ask me what the table was like because this was 
some time ago and I can't remember. It was probably round." 
"All right." 
"So let me give you the layout. Me sitting at the table. On my left, 
the newspaper. On my right, the cup of coffee. In the middle of the 
table, the packet of biscuits." 
"I see it perfectly." 
"What you don't see," said Arthur, "because I haven't mentioned 
him yet, is the guy sitting at the table already. He is sitting there 
opposite me." 
"What's he like?" 
"Perfectly ordinary. Briefcase. Business suit. He didn't look," said 
Arthur, "as if he was about to do anything weird." 
"Ah. I know the type. What did he do?" 
"He did this. He leaned across the table, picked up the packet of 
biscuits, tore it open, took one out, and..." 
"What?" 
"Ate it." 
"What?" 
"He ate it." 
Fenchurch looked at him in astonishment. "What on Earth did you 
do?" 
"Well, in the circumstances I did what any red`blooded Englishman 
would do. I was compelled," said Arthur, "to ignore it." 
"What? Why?" 
"Well, it's not the sort of thing you're trained for is it? I searched 
my soul, and discovered that there was nothing anywhere in my 
upbringing, experience or even primal instincts to tell me how to 
react to someone who has quite simply, calmly, sitting right there in 
front of me, stolen one of my biscuits." 
"Well, you could..." Fenchurch thought about it. "I must say I'm not 
sure what I would have done either. So what happened?" 
"I stared furiously at the crossword," said Arthur. "Couldn't do a 
single clue, took a sip of coffee, it was too hot to drink, so there was 
nothing for it. I braced myself. I took a biscuit, trying very hard not to 
notice," he added, "that the packet was already mysteriously open..." 
"But you're fighting back, taking a tough line." 
"After my fashion, yes. I ate the biscuit. I ate it very deliberately 
and visibly, so that he would have no doubt as to what it was I was 
doing. When I eat a biscuit," Arthur said, "it stays eaten." 
"So what did he do?" 
"Took another one. Honestly," insisted Arthur, "this is exactly what 
happened. He took another biscuit, he ate it. Clear as daylight. Certain 
as we are sitting on the ground." 
Fenchurch stirred uncomfortably. 
"And the problem was," said Arthur, "that having not said anything 
the first time, it was somehow even more difficult to broach the 
subject the second time around. What do you say? 'Excuse me... I 
couldn't help noticing, er...' Doesn't work. No, I ignored it with, if 
anything, even more vigour than previously." 
"My man..." 
"Stared at the crossword, again, still couldn't budge a bit of it, so 
showing some of the spirit that Henry V did on St Crispin's Day..." 
"What?" 
"I went into the breach again. I took," said Arthur, "another biscuit. 
And for an instant our eyes met." 
"Like this?" 
"Yes, well, no, not quite like that. But they met. Just for an instant. 
And we both looked away. But I am here to tell you," said Arthur, 
"that there was a little electricity in the air. There was a little tension 
building up over the table. At about this time." 
"I can imagine." 
"We went through the whole packet like this. Him, me, him, me ..." 
"The whole packet?" 
"Well it was only eight biscuits but it seemed like a lifetime of 
biscuits we were getting through at this point. Gladiators could hardly 
have had a tougher time." 
"Gladiators," said Fenchurch, "would have had to do it in the sun. 
More physically gruelling." 
"There is that. So. When the empty packet was lying dead between 
us the man at last got up, having done his worst, and left. I heaved a 
sigh of relief, of course. As it happened, my train was announced a 
moment or two later, so I finished my coffee, stood up, picked up the 
newspaper, and underneath the newspaper..." 
"Yes?" 
"Were my biscuits." 
"What?" said Fenchurch. "What?" 
"True." 
"No " She gasped and tossed herself back on the grass laughing. 
She sat up again. 
"You completely nitwit," she hooted, "you almost completely and 
utterly foolish person." 
She pushed him backwards, rolled over him, kissed him and rolled 
off again. He was surprised at how light she was. 
"Now you tell me a story." 
"I thought," she said putting on a low husky voice, "that you were 
very keen to get back." 
"No hurry," he said airily, "I want you to tell me a story." 
She looked out over the kale and pondered. 
"All right," she said, "it's only a short one. And not funny like yours, 
but... Anyway." 
She looked down. Arthur could feel that it was one of those sorts of 
moments. The air seemed to stand still around them, waiting. Arthur 
wished that the air would go away and mind its own business. 
"When I was a kid," she said. "These sort of stories always start like 
this, don't they, 'When I was a kid...' Anyway. This is the bit where the 
girl suddenly says, 'When I was a kid' and starts to unburden herself. 
We have got to that bit. When I was a kid I had this picture hanging 
over the foot of my bed... What do you think of it so far?" 
"I like it. I think it's moving well. You're getting the bedroom 
interest in nice and early. We could probably do with some 
development with the picture." 
"It was one of those pictures that children are supposed to like," 
she said, "but don't. Full of endearing little animals doing endearing 
things, you know?" 
"I know. I was plagued with them too. Rabbits in waistcoats." 
"Exactly. These rabbits were in fact on a raft, as were assorted rats 
and owls. There may even have been a reindeer." 
"On the raft." 
"On the raft. And a boy was sitting on the raft." 
"Among the rabbits in waistcoats and the owls and the reindeer." 
"Precisely there. A boy of the cheery gypsy ragamuffin variety." 
"Ugh." 
"The picture worried me, I must say. There was an otter swimming 
in front of the raft, and I used to lie awake at night worrying about 
this otter having to pull the raft, with all these wretched animals on it 
who shouldn't even be on a raft, and the otter had such a thin tail to 
pull it with I thought it must hurt pulling it all the time. Worried me. 
Not badly, but just vaguely, all the time. 
"Then one day ʹ and remember I'd been looking at this picture 
every night for years ʹ I suddenly noticed that the raft had a sail. 
Never seen it before. The otter was fine, he was just swimming 
along." 
She shrugged. 
"Good story?" she said. 
"Ends weakly," said Arthur, "leaves the audience crying 'Yes, but 
what of it?' Fine up till there, but needs a final sting before the 
credits." 
Fenchurch laughed and hugged her legs. 
"It was just such a sudden revelation, years of almost unnoticed 
worry just dropping away, like taking off heavy weights, like black and 
white becoming colour, like a dry stick suddenly being watered. The 
sudden shift of perspective that says 'Put away your worries, the 
world is a good and perfect place. It is in fact very easy.' You probably 
thing I'm saying that because I'm going to say that I felt like that this 
afternoon or something, don't you?" 
"Well, I..." said Arthur, his composure suddenly shattered. 
"Well, it's all right," she said, "I did. That's exactly what I felt. But 
you see, I've felt that before, even stronger. Incredibly strongly. I'm 
afraid I'm a bit of a one," she said gazing off into the distance, "for 
sudden startling revelations." 
Arthur was at sea, could hardly speak, and felt it wiser, therefore, 
for the moment not to try. 
"It was very odd," she said, much as one of the pursuing Egyptians 
might have said that the behaviour of the Red Sea when Moses 
waved his rod at it was a little on the strange side. 
"Very odd," she repeated, "for days before, the strangest feeling 
had been building in me, as if I was going to give birth. No, it wasn't 
like that in fact, it was more as if I was being connected into 
something, bit by bit. No, not even that; it was as if the whole of the 
Earth, through me, was going to..." 
"Does the number," said Arthur gently, "forty`two mean anything 
to you at all?" 
"What? No, what are you talking about?" exclaimed Fenchurch. 
"Just a thought," murmured Arthur. 
"Arthur, I mean this, this is very real to me, this is serious." 
"I was being perfectly serious," said Arthur. "It's just the Universe 
I'm never quite sure about." 
"What do you mean by that?" 
"Tell me the rest of it," he said. "Don't worry if it sounds odd. 
Believe me, you are talking to someone who has seen a lot of stuff," 
he added, "that is odd. And I don't mean biscuits." 
She nodded, and seemed to believe him. Suddenly, she gripped his 
arm. 
"It was so simple," she said, "so wonderfully and extraordinarily 
simple, when it came." 
"What was it?" said Arthur quietly. 
"Arthur, you see," she said, "that's what I no longer know. And the 
loss is unbearable. If I try to think back to it, it all goes flickery and 
jumpy, and if I try too hard, I get as far as the teacup and I just black 
out." 
"What?" 
"Well, like your story," she said, "the best bit happened in a cafe. I 
was sitting there, having a cup of tea. This was after days of this build 
up, the feeling of becoming connected up. I think I was buzzing gently. 
And there was some work going on at a building site opposite the cafe, 
and I was watching it through the window, over the rim of my teacup, 
which I always find is the nicest way of watching other people 
working. And suddenly, there it was in my mind, this message from 
somewhere. And it was so simple. It made such sense of everything. I 
just sat up and thought, 'Oh  Oh, well that's all right then.' I was so 
startled I almost dropped my teacup, in fact I think I did drop it. Yes," 
she added thoughtfully, "I'm sure I did. How much sense am I 
making?" 
"It was fine up to the bit about the teacup." 
She shook her head, and shook it again, as if trying to clear it, 
which is what she was trying to do. 
"Well that's it," she said. "Fine up to the bit about the teacup. That 
was the point at which it seemed to me quite literally as if the world 
exploded." 
"What...?" 
"I know it sounds crazy, and everybody says it was hallucinations, 
but if that was hallucinations then I have hallucinations in big screen 
3D with 16`track Dolby Stereo and should probably hire myself out to 
people who are bored with shark movies. It was as if the ground was 
literally ripped from under my feet, and... and..." 
She patted the grass lightly, as if for reassurance, and then seemed 
to change her mind about what she was going to say. 
"And I woke up in hospital. I suppose I've been in and out ever 
since. And that's why I have an instinctive nervousness," she said, "of 
sudden startling revelations that's everything's going to be all right." 
She looked up at him. 
Arthur had simply ceased to worry himself about the strange 
anomalies surrounding his return to his home world, or rather had 
consigned them to that part of his mind marked "Things to think 
about ʹ Urgent." "Here is the world," he had told himself. "Here, for 
whatever reason, is the world, and here it stays. With me on it." But 
now it seemed to go swimmy around him, as it had that night in the 
car when Fenchurch's brother had told him the silly stories about the 
CIA agent in the reservoir. The trees went swimmy. The lake went 
swimmy, but this was perfectly natural and nothing to be alarmed by 
because a grey goose had just landed on it. The geese were having a 
great relaxed time and had no major answers they wished to know 
the questions to. 
"Anyway," said Fenchurch, suddenly and brightly and with a wide`
eyed smile, "there is something wrong with part of me, and you've 
got to find out what it is. We'll go home." 
Arthur shook his head. 
"What's the matter?" she said. 
Arthur had shaken his head, not to disagree with her suggestion 
which he thought was a truly excellent one, one of the world's great 
suggestions, but because he was just for a moment trying to free 
himself of the recurring impression he had that just when he was 
least expecting it the Universe would suddenly leap out from behind a 
door and go boo at him. 
"I'm just trying to get this entirely clear in my mind," said Arthur, 
"you say you felt as if the Earth actually... exploded ..." 
"Yes. More than felt." 
"Which is what everybody else says," he said hesitantly, "is 
hallucinations?" 
"Yes, but Arthur that's ridiculous. People think that if you just say 
'hallucinations' it explains anything you want it to explain and 
eventually whatever it is you can't understand will just go away. It's 
just a word, it doesn't explain anything. It doesn't explain why the 
dolphins disappeared." 
"No," said Arthur. "No," he added thoughtfully. "No," he added 
again, even more thoughtfully. "What?" he said at last. 
"Doesn't explain the dolphins disappearing." 
"No," said Arthur, "I see that. Which dolphins do you mean?" 
"What do you mean which dolphins? I'm talking about when all the 
dolphins disappeared." 
She put her hand on his knee, which made him realize that the 
tingling going up and down his spine was not her gently stroking his 
back, and must instead be one of the nasty creepy feelings he so 
often got when people were trying to explain things to him. 
"The dolphins?" 
"Yes." 
"All the dolphins," said Arthur, "disappeared?" 
"Yes." 
"The dolphins? You're saying the dolphins all disappeared? Is this," 
said Arthur, trying to be absolutely clear on this point, "what you're 
saying?" 
"Arthur where have you been for heaven's sake? The dolphins all 
disappeared on the same day I..." 
She stared him intently in his startled eyes. 
"What...?" 
"No dolphins. All gone. Vanished." 
She searched his face. 
"Did you really not know that?" 
It was clear from his startled expression that he did not. 
"Where did they go?" he asked. 
"No one knows. That's what vanished means." She paused. "Well, 
there is one man who says he knows about it, but everyone says he 
lives in California," she said, "and is mad. I was thinking of going to 
see him because it seems the only lead I've got on what happened to 
me." 
She shrugged, and then looked at him long and quietly. She lay her 
hand on the side of his face. 
"I really would like to know where you've been," she said. "I think 
something terrible happened to you then as well. And that's why we 
recognized each other."
She glanced around the park, which was now being gathered into 
the clutches of dusk. 
"Well," she said, "now you've got someone you can tell." 
Arthur slowly let out a long year of a sigh. 
"It is," he said, "a very long story." 
Fenchurch leaned across him and drew over her canvas bag. 
"Is it anything to do with this?" she said. The thing she took out of 
her bag was battered and travelworn as it had been hurled into 
prehistoric rivers, baked under the sun that shines so redly on the 
deserts of Kakrafoon, half`buried in the marbled sands that fringe the 
heady vapoured oceans of Santraginus V, frozen on the glaciers of the 
moon of Jaglan Beta, sat on, kicked around spaceships, scuffed and 
generally abused, and since its makers had thought that these were 
exactly the sorts of things that might happen to it, they had 
thoughtfully encased it in a sturdy plastic cover and written on it, in 
large friendly letters, the words "Don't Panic". 
"Where did you get this?" said Arthur, startled, taking it from her. 
"Ah," she said, "I thought it was yours. In Russell's car that night. 
You dropped it. Have you been to many of these places?" 
Arthur drew the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy from its cover. It 
was like a small, thin, flexible lap computer. He tapped some buttons 
till the screen flared with text. 
"A few," he said. 
"Can we go to them?" 
"What? No," said Arthur abruptly, then relented, but relented 
warily. "Do you want to?" he said, hoping for the answer no. It was an 
act of great generosity on his part not to say, "You don't want to, do 
you?" which expects it. 
"Yes," she said. "I want to know what the message was that I lost, 
and where it came from. Because I don't think," she added, standing 
up and looking round the increasing gloom of the park, "that it came 
from here." 
"I'm not even sure," she further added, slipping her arm around 
Arthur's waist, "that I know where here is." 
Chapter 21
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is, as has been remarked 
before often and accurately, a pretty startling kind of a thing. It is, 
essentially, as the title implies, a Guide book. The problem is, or 
rather one of the problems, for there are many, a sizeable portion of 
which are continually clogging up the civil, commercial and criminal 
courts in all areas of the Galaxy, and especially, where possible, the 
more corrupt ones, this. 
The previous sentence makes sense. That is not the problem. 
This is: 
Change. 
Read it through again and you'll get it. 
The Galaxy is a rapidly changing place. There is, frankly, so much of 
it, every bit of which is continually on the move, continually changing. 
A bit of a nightmare, you might think, for a scrupulous and 
conscientious editor diligently striving to keep this massively detailed 
and complex electronic tome abreast of all the changing 
circumstances and conditions that the Galaxy throws up every minute 
of every hour of every day, and you would be wrong. Where you 
would be wrong would be in failing to realize that the editor, like all 
the editors of the Guide has ever had, has no real grasp of the 
meanings of the words "scrupulous", "conscientious" or "diligent", 
and tends to get his nightmares through a straw. 
Entries tend to get updated or not across the Sub`Etha Net 
according to if they read good. 
Take for example, the case of Brequinda on the Foth of Avalars, 
famed in myth, legend and stultifyingly dull tri`d mini`serieses as 
home of the magnificent and magical Fuolornis Fire Dragon. 
In Ancient days, when Fragilis sang and Saxaquine of the Quenelux 
held sway, when the air was sweet and the nights fragrant, but 
everyone somehow managed to be, or so they claimed, though how 
on earth they could have thought that anyone was even remotely 
likely to believe such a preposterous claim what with all the sweet air 
and fragrant nights and whatnot is anyone's guess, virgins, it was not 
possible to heave a brick on Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars without 
hitting at least half a dozen Fuolornis Fire Dragons. 
Whether you would want to do that is another matter. 
Not that Fire Dragons weren't an essentially peace`loving species, 
because they were. They adored it to bits, and this wholesale adoring 
of things to bits was often in itself the problem: one so often hurts the 
one loves, especially if one is a Fuolornis Fire Dragon with breath like 
a rocket booster and teeth like a park fence. Another problem was 
that once they were in the mood they often went on to hurt quite a 
lot of the ones that other people loved as well. Add to all that the 
relatively small number of madmen who actually went around the 
place heaving bricks, and you end up with a lot of people on 
Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars getting seriously hurt by dragons. 
But did they mind? They did not. 
Were they heard to bemoan their fate? No. 
The Fuolornis Fire Dragons were revered throughout the lands of 
Brequinda in the Foth of valors for their savage beauty, their noble 
ways and their habit of biting people who didn't revere them. 
Why was this? 
The answer was simple. 
Sex. 
There is, for some unfathomed reason, something almost 
unbearably sexy about having huge fire`breathing magical dragons 
flying low about the sky on moonlit nights which were already 
dangerously on the sweet and fragrant side. 
Why this should be so, the romance`besotted people of Brequinda 
in the Foth of Avalars could not have told you, and would not have 
stopped to discuss the matter once the effect was up and going, for 
no sooner would a flock of half a dozen silk`winged leather`bodied 
Fuolornis Fire Dragons heave into sight across the evening horizon 
than half the people of Brequinda are scurrying off into the woods 
with the other half, there to spend a busy breathless night together 
and emerge with the first rays of dawn all smiling and happy and still 
claiming, rather endearingly, to be virgins, if rather flushed and sticky 
virgins. 
Pheromones, some researchers said. 
Something sonic, others claimed. 
The place was always stiff with researchers trying to get to the 
bottom of it all and taking a very long time about it. 
Not surprisingly, the Guide's graphically enticing description of the 
general state of affairs on this planet has proved to be astonishingly 
popular amongst hitch`hikers who allow themselves to be Guided by 
it, and so it has simply never been taken out, and it is therefore left to 
latter`day travellers to find out for themselves that today's modern 
Brequinda in the City State of Avalars is now little more than concrete, 
strip joints and Dragon Burger Bars. 
Chapter 22
The night in Islington was sweet and fragrant. 
There were, of course, no Fuolornis Fire Dragons about in the alley, 
but if any had chanced by they might just as well have sloped off 
across the road for a pizza, for they were not going to be needed. 
Had an emergency cropped up while they were still in the middle 
of their American Hots with extra anchovy they could always have 
sent across a message to put Dire Straits on the stereo, which is now 
known to have much the same effect. 
"No," said Fenchurch, "not yet." 
Arthur put Dire Straits on the stereo. Fenchurch pushed ajar the 
upstairs front door to let in a little more of the sweet fragrant night 
air. They both sat on some of the furniture made out of cushions, very 
close to the open bottle of champagne. 
"No," said Fenchurch, "not till you've found out what's wrong with 
me, which bit. But I suppose," she added very, very, very quietly, "that 
we may as well start with where your hand is now." 
Arthur said, "So which way do I go?" 
"Down," said Fenchurch, "on this occasion." 
He moved his hand. 
"Down," she said, "is in fact the other way." 
"Oh yes." 
Mark Knopfler has an extraordinary ability to make a Schecter 
Custom Stratocaster hoot and sing like angels on a Saturday night, 
exhausted from being good all week and needing a stiff beer ʹ which 
is not strictly relevant at this point since the record hadn't yet got to 
that bit, but there will be too much else going on when it does, and 
furthermore the chronicler does not intend to sit here with a track list 
and a stopwatch, so it seems best to mention it now while things are 
still moving slowly. 
"And so we come," said Arthur, "to your knee. There is something 
terribly and tragically wrong with your left knee." 
"My left knee," said Fenchurch, "is absolutely fine." 
"Do it is." 
"Did you know that..." 
"What?" 
"Ahm, it's all right. I can tell you do. No, keep going." 
"So it has to be something to do with your feet..." 
She smiled in the dim light, and wriggled her shoulders 
noncommittally against the cushions. Since there are cushions in the 
Universe, on Squornshellous Beta to be exact, two worlds in from the 
swampland of the mattresses, that actively enjoy being wriggled 
against, particularly if it's noncommittally because of the syncopated 
way in which the shoulders move, it's a pity they weren't there. They 
weren't, but such is life. 
Arthur held her left foot in his lap and looked it over carefully. All 
kinds of stuff about the way her dress fell away from her legs was 
making it difficult for him to think particularly clearly at this point. 
"I have to admit," he said, "that I really don't know what I'm 
looking for." 
"You'll know when you find it," she said. "Really you will." There 
was a slight catch in her voice. "It's not that one." 
Feeling increasingly puzzled, Arthur let her left foot down on the 
floor and moved himself around so that he could take her right foot. 
She moved forward, put her arms round and kissed him, because the 
record had got to that bit which, if you knew the record, you would 
know made it impossible not to do this. 
Then she gave him her right foot. 
He stroked it, ran his fingers round her ankle, under her toes, along 
her instep, could find nothing wrong with it. 
She watched him with great amusement, laughed and shook her 
head. 
"No, don't stop," she said, "but it's not that one now." 
Arthur stopped, and frowned at her left foot on the floor. 
"Don't stop." 
He stroked her right foot, ran his fingers around her ankle, under 
her toes, along her instep and said, "You mean it's something to do 
with which leg I'm holding...?" 
She did another of the shrugs which would have brought such joy 
into the life of a simple cushion from Squornshellous Beta. 
He frowned. 
"Pick me up," she said quietly. 
He let her right foot down to the floor and stood up. So did she. He 
picked her up in his arms and they kissed again. This went on for a 
while, then she said, "Now put me down again." 
Still puzzled, he did so. 
"Well?" 
She looked at him almost challengingly. 
"So what's wrong with my feet?" she said. 
Arthur still did not understand. He sat on the floor, then got down 
on his hands and knees to look at her feet, in situ, as it were, in their 
normal habitat. And as he looked closely, something odd struck him. 
He pit his head right down to the ground and peered. There was a 
long pause. He sat back heavily. 
"Yes," he said, "I see what's wrong with your feet. They don't touch 
the ground." 
"So... so what do you think...?" 
Arthur looked up at her quickly and saw the deep apprehension 
making her eyes suddenly dark. She bit her lip and was trembling. 
"What do..." she stammered. "Are you...?" She shook the hair 
forwards over her eyes that were filling with dark fearful tears. 
He stood up quickly, put his arms around her and gave her a single 
kiss. 
"Perhaps you can do what I can do," he said, and walked straight 
out of her upstairs front door. 
The record got to the good bit. 
Chapter 23
The battle raged on about the star of Xaxis. Hundreds of the fierce 
and horribly beweaponed Zirzla ships had now been smashed and 
wrenched to atoms by the withering forces the huge silver Xaxisian 
ship was able to deploy. 
Part of the moon had gone too, blasted away by those same 
blazing forceguns that ripped the very fabric of space as they passed 
through it. 
The Zirzla ships that remained, horribly beweaponed though they 
were, were now hopelessly outclassed by the devastating power of 
the Xaxisian ship, and were fleeing for cover behind the rapidly 
disintegrating moon, when the Xaxisian ship, in hurtling pursuit 
behind them, suddenly announced that it needed a holiday and left 
the field of battle. 
All was redoubled fear and consternation for a moment, but the 
ship was gone. 
With the stupendous powers at its command it flitted across vast 
tracts of irrationally shaped space, quickly, effortlessly, and above all, 
quietly. 
Deep in his greasy, smelly bunk, fashioned out of a maintenance 
hatchway, Ford Prefect slept among his towels, dreaming of old 
haunts. He dreamed at one point in his slumbers of New York. 
In his dream he was walking late at night along the East Side, 
beside the river which had become so extravagantly polluted that 
new lifeforms were now emerging from it spontaneously, demanding 
welfare and voting rights. 
One of those now floated past, waving. Ford waved back. 
The thing thrashed to the shore and struggled up the bank. 
"Hi," it said, "I've just been created. I'm completely new to the 
Universe in all respects. Is there anything you can tell me?" 
"Phew," said Ford, a little nonplussed, "I can tell you where some 
bars are, I guess." 
"What about love and happiness. I sense deep needs for things like 
that," it said, waving its tentacles. "Got any leads there?" 
"You can get some like what you require," said Ford, "on Seventh 
Avenue." 
"I instinctively feel," said the creature, urgently, "that I need to be 
beautiful. Am I?" 
"You're pretty direct, aren't you?" 
"No point in mucking about. Am I?" 
"To me?" said Ford. "No. But listen," he added after a moment, 
"most people make out, you know. Are there and like you down 
there?" 
"Search me, buster," said the creature, "as I said, I'm new here. Life 
is entirely strange to me. What's it like?" 
Here was something that Ford felt he could speak about with 
authority. 
"Life," he said, "is like a grapefruit." 
"Er, how so?" 
"Well, it's sort of orangey`yellow and dimpled on the outside, wet 
and squidgy in the middle. It's got pips inside, too. Oh, and some 
people have half a one for breakfast." 
"Is there anyone else out there I can talk to?" 
"I expect so," said Ford. "Ask a policeman." 
Deep in his bunk, Ford Prefect wriggled and turned on to his other 
side. It wasn't his favourite type of dream because it didn't have 
Eccentrica Gallumbits, the Triple`Breasted Whore of Eroticon VI in it, 
whom many of his dreams did feature. But at least it was a dream. At 
least he was asleep. 
Chapter 24
Luckily there was a strong updraft in the alley because Arthur 
hadn't done this sort of thing for a while, at least, not deliberately, 
and deliberately is exactly the way you are not meant to do it. 
He swung down sharply, nearly catching himself a nasty crack on 
the jaw with the doorstep and tumbled through the air, so suddenly 
stunned with what a profoundly stupid thing he had just done that he 
completely forgot the bit about hitting the ground and didn't. 
A nice trick, he thought to himself, if you can do it. 
The ground was hanging menacingly above his head. 
He tried not to think about the ground, what an extraordinarily big 
thing it was and how much it would hurt him if it decided to stop 
hanging there and suddenly fell on him. He tried to think nice 
thoughts about lemurs instead, which was exactly the right thing to 
do because he couldn't at that moment remember precisely what a 
lemur was, if it was one of those things that sweep in great majestic 
herds across the plains of wherever it was or if that was wildebeests, 
so it was a tricky kind of thing to think nice thoughts about without 
simply resorting to an icky sort of general well`disposedness towards 
things, and all this kept his mind well occupied while his body tried to 
adjust to the fact that it wasn't touching anything. 
A Mars bar wrapper fluttered down the alleyway. 
After a seeming moment of doubt and indecision it eventually 
allowed the wind to ease it, fluttering, between him and the ground. 
"Arthur..." 
The ground was still hanging menacingly above his head, and he 
thought it was probably time to do something about that, such as fall 
away from it, which is what he did. Slowly. Very, very slowly. 
As he fell slowly, very, very slowly, he closed his eyes ʹ carefully, so 
as not to jolt anything. 
The feel of his eyes closing ran down his whole body. Once it had 
reached his feet, and the whole of his body was alerted to the fact 
that his eyes were now closed and was not panicked by it, he slowly, 
very, very slowly, revolved his body one way and his mind the other. 
That should sort the ground out. 
He could feel the air clear about him now, breezing around him 
quite cheerfully, untroubled by his being there, and slowly, very, very 
slowly, as from a deep and distant sleep, he opened his eyes. 
He had flown before, of course, flown many times on Krikkit until 
all the birdtalk had driven him scatty, but this was different. 
Here he was on his own world, quietly, and without fuss, beyond a 
slight trembling which could have been attributable to a number of
things, being in the air. 
Ten or fifteen feet below him was the hard tarmac and a few yards 
off to the right the yellow street lights of Upper Street. 
Luckily the alleyway was dark since the light which was supposed 
to see it through the night was on an ingenious timeswitch which 
meant it came on just before lunchtime and went off again as the 
evening was beginning to draw in. He was, therefore, safely shrouded 
in a blanket of dark obscurity. 
He slowly, very, very slowly, lifted his head to Fenchurch, who was 
standing in silent breathless amazement, silhouetted in her upstairs 
doorway. 
Her face was inches from his. 
"I was about to ask you," she said in a low trembly voice, "what you 
were doing. But then I realized that I could see what you were doing. 
You were flying. So it seemed," she went on after a slight wondering 
pause, "like a bit of a silly question." 
Arthur said, "Can you do it?" 
"No." 
"Would you like to try?" 
She bit her lip and shook her head, not so much to say no, but just 
in sheer bewilderment. She was shaking like a leaf. 
"It's quite easy," urged Arthur, "if you don't know how. That's the 
important bit. Be not at all sure how you're doing it." 
Just to demonstrate how easy it was he floated away down the 
alley, fell upwards quite dramatically and bobbed back down to her 
like a banknote on a breath of wind. 
"Ask me how I did that." 
"How... did you do that?" 
"No idea. Not a clue." 
She shrugged in bewilderment. "So how can I...?" 
Arthur bobbed down a little lower and held out his hand. 
"I want you to try," he said, "to step on my hand. Just one foot." 
"What?" 
"Try it." 
Nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if she was trying 
to step on the hand of someone who was floating in front of her in 
midair, she stepped on to his hand. 
"Now the other." 
"What?" 
"Take the weight off your back foot." 
"I can't." 
"Try it." 
"Like this?" 
"Like that." 
Nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if ʹ She stopped 
telling herself what she was doing was like because she had a feeling 
she didn't altogether want to know. 
She fixed her eyes very firmly on the guttering of the roof of the 
decrepit warehouse opposite which had been annoying her for weeks 
because it was clearly going to fall off and she wondered if anyone 
was going to do anything about it or whether she ought to say 
something to somebody, and didn't think for a moment about the fact 
that she was standing on the hands of someone who wasn't standing 
on anything at all. 
"Now," said Arthur, "take your weight off your left foot." 
She thought that the warehouse belonged to the carpet company 
who had their offices round the corner, and took the weight off her 
left foot, so she should probably go and see them about the gutter. 
"Now," said Arthur, "take the weight off your right foot." 
"I can't." 
"Try." 
She hadn't seen the guttering from quite this angle before, and it 
looked to her now as if as well as the mud and gunge up there might 
also be a bird's nest. If she leaned forward just a little and took her 
weight off her right foot, she could probably see it more clearly. 
Arthur was alarmed to see that someone down in the alley was 
trying to steal her bicycle. He particularly didn't want to get involved 
in an argument at the moment and hoped that the guy would do it 
quietly and not look up. 
He had the quiet shifty look of someone who habitually stole 
bicycles in alleys and habitually didn't expect to find their owners 
hovering several feet above them. He was relaxed by both these 
habits, and went about his job with purpose and concentration, and 
when he found that the bike was unarguably bound by hoops of 
tungsten carbide to an iron bar embedded in concrete, he peacefully 
bent both its wheels and went on his way. 
Arthur let out a long`held breath. 
"See what a piece of eggshell I have found you," said Fenchurch in 
his ear. 
Chapter 25
Those who are regular followers of the doings of Arthur Dent may 
have received an impression of his character and habits which, while 
it includes the truth and, of course, nothing but the truth, falls 
somewhat short, in its composition, of the whole truth in all its 
glorious aspects. 
And the reasons for this are obvious. Editing, selection, the need to 
balance that which is interesting with that which is relevant and cut 
out all the tedious happenstance. 
Like this for instance. "Arthur Dent went to bed. He went up the 
stairs, all fifteen of them, opened the door, went into his room, took 
off his shoes and socks and then all the rest of his clothes one by one 
and left them in a neatly crumpled heap on the floor. He put on his 
pyjamas, the blue ones with the stripe. He washed his face and hands, 
cleaned his teeth, went to the lavatory, realized that he had once 
again got this all in the wrong order, had to wash his hands again and 
went to bed. He read for fifteen minutes, spending the first ten 
minutes of that trying to work out where in the book he had got to 
the previous night, then he turned out the light and within a minute 
or so more was asleep. 
"It was dark. He lay on his left side for a good hour. 
"After that he moved restlessly in his sleep for a moment and then 
turned over to sleep on his right side. Another hour after this his eyes 
flickered briefly and he slightly scratched his nose, though there was 
still a good twenty minutes to go before he turned back on to his left 
side. And so he whiled the night away, sleeping. 
"At four he got up and went to the lavatory again. He opened the 
door to the lavatory..." and so on. 
It's guff. It doesn't advance the action. It makes for nice fat books 
such as the American market thrives on, but it doesn't actually get 
you anywhere. You don't, in short, want to know. 
But there are other omissions as well, beside the teethcleaning and 
trying to find fresh socks variety, and in some of these people have 
often seemed inordinately interested. 
What, they want to know, about all that stuff off in the wings with 
Arthur and Trillian, did that ever get anywhere? 
To which the answer is, of course, mind your own business. 
And what, they say, was he up to all those nights on the planet 
Krikkit? Just because the planet didn't have Fuolornis Fire Dragons or 
Dire Straits doesn't mean that everyone just sat up every night 
reading. 
Or to take a more specific example, what about the night after the 
committee meeting party on Prehistoric Earth, when Arthur found 
himself sitting on a hillside watching the moon rise over the softly 
burning trees in company with a beautiful young girl called Mella, 
recently escaped from a lifetime of staring every morning at a 
hundred nearly identical photographs of moodily lit tubes of 
toothpaste in the art department of an advertising agency on the 
planet Golgafrincham. What then? What happened next? And the 
answer is, of course, that the book ended. 
The next one didn't resume the story till five years later, and you 
can, claim some, take discretion too far. "This Arthur Dent," comes 
the cry from the furthest reaches of the galaxy, and has even now 
been found inscribed on a mysterious deep space probe thought to 
originate from an alien galaxy at a distance too hideous to 
contemplate, "What is he, man or mouse? Is he interested in nothing 
more than tea and the wider issues of life? Has he no spirit? Has he 
no passion? Does he not, to put it in a nutshell, fuck?" 
Those who wish to know should read on. Others may wish to skip 
on to the last chapter which is a good bit and has Marvin in it. 
Chapter 26
Arthur Dent allowed himself for an unworthy moment to think, as 
they drifted up, that he very much hoped that his friends who had 
always found him pleasant but dull, or more latterly, odd but dull, 
were having a good time in the pub, but that was the last time, for a 
while, that he thought of them. 
They drifted up, spiralling slowly around each other, like sycamore 
seeds falling from sycamore trees in the autumn, except going the 
other way. 
And as they drifted up their minds sang with the ecstatic 
knowledge that either what they were doing was completely and 
utterly and totally impossible or that physics had a lot of catching up 
to do. 
Physics shook its head and, looking the other way, concentrated on 
keeping the cars going along the Euston Road and out towards the 
Westway flyover, on keeping the streetlights lit and on making sure 
that when somebody on Baker Street dropped a cheeseburger it went 
splat upon the ground. 
Dwindling headily beneath them, the beaded strings of light of 
London ʹ London, Arthur had to keep reminding himself, not the 
strangely coloured fields of Krikkit on the remote fringes of the galaxy, 
lighted freckles of which faintly spanned the opening sky above them, 
but London ʹ swayed, swaying and turning, turned. 
"Try a swoop," he called to Fenchurch. 
"What?" 
Her voice seemed strangely clear but distant in all the vast empty 
air. It was breathy and faint with disbelief ʹ all those things, clear, 
faint, distant, breathy, all at the same time. 
"We're flying..." she said. 
"A trifle," called Arthur, "think nothing of it. Try a swoop." 
"A sw ʹ " 
Her hand caught his, and in a second her weight caught it too, and 
stunningly, she was gone, tumbling beneath him, clawing wildly at 
nothing. 
Physics glanced at Arthur, and clotted with horror he was gone too, 
sick with giddy dropping, every part of him screaming but his voice. 
They plummeted because this was London and you really couldn't 
do this sort of thing here. 
He couldn't catch her because this was London, and not a million 
miles from here, seven hundred and fifty`six, to be exact, in Pisa, 
Galileo had clearly demonstrated that two falling bodies fell at exactly 
the same rate of acceleration irrespective of their relative weights. 
They fell. 
Arthur realized as he fell, giddily and sickeningly, that if he was 
going to hang around in the sky believing everything that the Italians 
had to say about physics when they couldn't even keep a simple 
tower straight, that they were in dead trouble, and damn well did fall 
faster than Fenchurch. 
He grappled her from above, and fumbled for a tight grip on her 
shoulders. He got it. 
Fine. They were now falling together, which was all very sweet and 
romantic, but didn't solve the basic problem, which was that they 
were falling, and the ground wasn't waiting around to see if he had 
any more clever tricks up his sleeve, but was coming up to meet them 
like an express train. 
He couldn't support her weight, he hadn't anything he could 
support it with or against. The only thing he could think was that they 
were obviously going to die, and if he wanted anything other than the 
obvious to happen he was going to have to do something other than 
the obvious. Here he felt he was on familiar territory. 
He let go of her, pushed her away, and when she turned her face to 
him in a gasp of stunned horror, caught her little finger with his little 
finger and swung her back upwards, tumbling clumsily up after her. 
"Shit," she said, as she sat panting and breathless on absolutely 
nothing at all, and when she had recovered herself they fled on up 
into the night. 
Just below cloud level they paused and scanned where they had 
impossibly come. The ground was something not to regard with any 
too firm or steady an eye, but merely to glance at, as it were, in 
passing. 
Fenchurch tried some little swoops, daringly, and found that if she 
judged herself just right against a body of wind she could pull off 
some really quite dazzling ones with a little pirouette at the end, 
followed by a little drop which made her dress billow around her, and 
this is where readers who are keen to know what Marvin and Ford 
Prefect have been up to all this while should look ahead to later 
chapters, because Arthur now could wait no longer and helped her 
take it off. 
It drifted down and away whipped by the wind until it was a speck 
which finally vanished, and for various complicated reasons 
revolutionized the life of a family on Hounslow, over whose washing 
line it was discovered draped in the morning. 
In a mute embrace, they drifted up till they were swimming 
amongst the misty wraiths of moisture that you can see feathering 
around the wings of an aeroplane but never feel because you are 
sitting warm inside the stuffy aeroplane and looking through the little 
scratchy perspex window while somebody else's son tries patiently to 
pour warm milk into your shirt. 
Arthur and Fenchurch could feel them, wispy cold and thin, 
wreathing round their bodies, very cold, very thin. They felt, even 
Fenchurch, now protected from the elements by only a couple of 
fragments from Marks and Spencer, that if they were not going to let 
the force of gravity bother them, then mere cold or paucity of 
atmosphere could go and whistle. 
The two fragments from Marks and Spencer which, as Fenchurch 
rose now into the misty body of the clouds, Arthur removed very, 
very slowly, which is the only way it's possible to do it when you're 
flying and also not using your hands, went on to create considerable 
havoc in the morning in, respectively, counting from top to bottom, 
Isleworth and Richmond. 
They were in the cloud for a long time, because it was stacked very 
high, and when finally they emerged wetly above it, Fenchurch slowly 
spinning like a starfish lapped by a rising tidepool, they found that 
above the clouds is where the night get seriously moonlit. 
The light is darkly brilliant. There are different mountains up there, 
but they are mountains, with their own white arctic snows. 
They had emerged at the top of the high`stacked cumulo`nimbus, 
and now began lazily to drift down its contours, as Fenchurch eased 
Arthur in turn from his clothes, prised him free of them till all were 
gone, winding their surprised way down into the enveloping 
whiteness. 
She kissed him, kissed his neck, his chest, and soon they were 
drifting on, turning slowly, in a kind of speechless T`shape, which 
might have caused even a Fuolornis Fire Dragon, had one flown past, 
replete with pizza, to flap its wings and cough a little. 
There were, however, no Fuolornis Fire Dragons in the clouds nor 
could there be for, like the dinosaurs, the dodos, and the Greater 
Drubbered Wintwock of Stegbartle Major in the constellation Fraz, 
and unlike the Boeing 747 which is in plentiful supply, they are sadly 
extinct, and the Universe shall never know their like again. 
The reason that a Boeing 747 crops up rather unexpectedly in the 
above list is not unconnected with the fact that something very 
similar happened in the lives of Arthur and Fenchurch a moment or 
two later. 
They are big things, terrifyingly big. You know when one is in the air 
with you. There is a thunderous attack of air, a moving wall of 
screaming wind, and you get tossed aside, if you are foolish enough to 
be doing anything remotely like what Arthur and Fenchurch were 
doing in its close vicinity, like butterflies in the Blitz. 
This time, however, there was a heart`sickening fall or loss of nerve, 
a re`grouping moments later and a wonderful new idea 
enthusiastically signalled through the buffeting noise. 
Mr.s E. Kapelsen of Boston, Massachusetts was an elderly lady, 
indeed, she felt her life was nearly at an end. She had seen a lot of it, 
been puzzled by some, but, she was a little uneasy to feel at this late 
stage, bored by too much. It had all been very pleasant, but perhaps a 
little too explicable, a little too routine. 
With a sigh she flipped up the little plastic window shutter and 
looked out over the wing. 
At first she thought she ought to call the stewardess, but then she 
thought no, damn it, definitely not, this was for her, and her alone. 
By the time her two inexplicable people finally slipped back off the 
wing and tumbled into the slipstream she had cheered up an awful lot. 
She was mostly immensely relieved to think that virtually 
everything that anybody had ever told her was wrong. 
The following morning Arthur and Fenchurch slept very late in the 
alley despite the continual wail of furniture being restored. 
The following night they did it all over again, only this time with 
Sony Walkmen. 
Chapter 27
"This is all very wonderful," said Fenchurch a few days later. "But I 
do need to know what has happened to me. You see, there's this 
difference between us. That you lost something and found it again, 
and I found something and lost it. I need to find it again." 
She had to go out for the day, so Arthur settled down for a day of 
telephoning. 
Murray Bost Henson was a journalist on one of the papers with 
small pages and big print. It would be pleasant to be able to say that 
he was none the worse for it, but sadly, this was not the case. He 
happened to be the only journalist that Arthur knew, so Arthur 
phoned him anyway. 
"Arthur my old soup spoon, my old silver turreen, how particularly 
stunning to hear from you. Someone told me you'd gone off into 
space or something." 
Murray had his own special kind of conversation language which he 
had invented for his own use, and which no one else was able to 
speak or even to follow. Hardly any of it meant anything at all. The 
bits which did mean anything were often so wonderfully buried that 
no one could ever spot them slipping past in the avalance of nonsense. 
The time when you did find out, later, which bits he did mean, was 
often a bad time for all concerned. 
"What?" said Arthur. 
"Just a rumour my old elephant tusk, my little green baize card 
table, just a rumour. Probably means nothing at all, but I may need a 
quote from you." 
"Nothing to say, just pub talk." 
"We thrive on it, my old prosthetic limb, we thrive on it. Plus it 
would fit like a whatsit in one of those other things with the other 
stories of the week, so it could be just to have you denying it. Excuse 
me, something has just fallen out of my ear." 
There was a slight pause, at the end of which Murray Bost Henson 
came back on the line sounding genuinely shaken. 
"Just remembered," he said, "what an odd evening I had last night. 
Anyway my old, I won't say what, how do you feel about having 
ridden on Halley's Comet?" 
"I haven't," said Arthur with a suppressed sigh, "ridden on Halley's 
Comet." 
"OK, How do you feel about not having ridden on Halley's Comet?" 
"Pretty relaxed, Murray." 
There was a pause while Murray wrote this down. 
"Good enough for me, Arthur, good enough for Ethel and me and 
the chickens. Fits in with the general weirdness of the week. Week of 
the Weirdos, we're thinking of calling it. Good, eh?" 
"Very good." 
"Got a ring to it. First we have this man it always rains on." 
"What?" 
"It's the absolute stocking top truth. All documented in his little 
black book, it all checks out at every single funloving level. The Met 
Office is going ice cold thick banana whips, and funny little men in 
white coats are flying in from all over the world with their little rulers 
and boxes and drip feeds. This man is the bee's knees, Arthur, he is 
the wasp's nipples. He is, I would go so far as to say, the entire set of 
erogenous zones of every major flying insect of the Western world. 
We're calling him the Rain God. Nice, eh?" 
"I think I've met him." 
"Good ring to it. What did you say?" 
"I may have met him. Complains all the time, yes?" 
"Incredible  You met the Rain God?" 
"If it's the same guy. I told him to stop complaining and show 
someone his book." 
There was an impressed pause from Murray Bost Henson's end of 
the phone. 
"Well, you did a bundle. An absolute bundle has absolutely been 
done by you. Listen, do you know how much a tour operator is paying 
that guy not to go to Malaga this year? I mean forget irrigating the 
Sahara and boring stuff like that, this guy has a whole new career 
ahead of him, just avoiding places for money. The man's turning into a 
monster, Arthur, we might even have to make him win the bingo. 
"Listen, we may want to do a feature on you, Arthur, the Man Who 
Made the Rain God Rain. Got a ring to it, eh?" 
"A nice one, but..." 
"We may need to photograph you under a garden shower, but 
that'll be OK. Where are you?" 
"Er, I'm in Islington. Listen, Murray..." 
"Islington " 
"Yes..." 
"Well, what about the real weirdness of the week, the real 
seriously loopy stuff. You know anything about these flying people?" 
"No." 
"You must have. This is the real seethingly crazy one. This is the 
real meatballs in the batter. Locals are phoning in all the time to say 
there's this couple who go flying nights. We've got guys down in our 
photo labs working through the night to put together a genuine 
photograph. You must have heard." 
"No." 
"Arthur, where have you been? Oh, space, right, I got your quote. 
But that was months ago. Listen, it's night after night this week, my 
old cheesegrater, right on your patch. This couple just fly around the 
sky and start doing all kinds of stuff. And I don't mean looking through 
walls or pretending to be box girder bridges. You don't know 
anything?" 
"No." 
"Arthur, it's been almost inexpressibly delicious conversing with 
you, chumbum, but I have to go. I'll send the guy with the camera and 
the hose. Give me the address, I'm ready and writing." 
"Listen, Murray, I called to ask you something." 
"I have a lot to do." 
"I just wanted to find out something about the dolphins." 
"No story. Last year's news. Forget 'em. They're gone." 
"It's important." 
"Listen, no one will touch it. You can't sustain a story, you know, 
when the only news is the continuing absence of whatever the story's 
about. Not our territory anyway, try the Sundays. Maybe they'll run a 
little 'Whatever Happened to "Whatever Happened to the Dolphins"' 
story in a couple of years, around August. But what's anybody going 
to do now? 'Dolphins still gone'? 'Continuing Dolphin Absence'? 
'Dolphins ʹ Further Days Without Them'? The story dies, Arthur. It lies 
down and kicks its little feet in the air and presently goes to the great 
golden spike in the sky, my old fruitbat." 
"Murray, I'm not interested in whether it's a story. I just want to 
find out how I can get in touch with that guy in California who claims 
to know something about it. I thought you might know." 
Chapter 28
"People are beginning to talk," said Fenchurch that evening, after 
they had hauled her 'cello in. 
"Not only talk," said Arthur, "but print, in big bold letters under the 
bingo prizes. Which is why I thought I'd better get these." 
He showed her the long narrow booklets of airline tickets. 
"Arthur " she said, hugging him. "Does that mean you managed to 
talk to him?" 
"I have had a day," said Arthur, "of extreme telephonic exhaustion. 
I have spoken to virtually every department of virtually every paper in 
Fleet street, and I finally tracked his number down." 
"You've obviously been working hard, you're drenched with sweat 
poor darling." 
"Not with sweat," said Arthur wearily. "A photographer's just been. 
I tried to argue, but ʹ never mind, the point is, yes." 
"You spoke to him." 
"I spoke to his wife. She said he was too weird to come to the 
phone right now and could I call back." 
He sat down heavily, realized he was missing something and went 
to the fridge to find it. 
"Want a drink?" 
"Would commit murder to get one. I always know I'm in for a tough 
time when my 'cello teacher looks me up and down and says, 'Ah yes, 
my dear, I think a little Tchaikovsky today.'." 
"I called again," said Arthur, "and she said that he was 3.2 light 
years from the phone and I should call back." 
"Ah." 
"I called again. "She said the situation had improved. He was now a 
mere 2.6 light years from the phone but it was still a long way to 
shout." 
"You don't suppose," said Fenchurch, doubtfully, "that there's 
anyone else we can talk to?" 
"It gets worse," said Arthur, "I spoke to someone on a science 
magazine who actually knows him, and he said that John Watson will 
not only believe, but will actually have absolute proof, often dictated 
to him by angels with golden beards and green wings and Doctor 
Scholl footwear, that the month's most fashionable silly theory is true. 
For people who question the validity of these visions he will 
triumphantly produce the clogs in question, and that's as far as you 
get." 
"I didn't realize it was that bad," said Fenchurch quietly. She fiddled 
listlessly with the tickets. 
"I phoned Mrs. Watson again," said Arthur. "Her name, by the way, 
and you may wish to know this, is Arcane Jill." 
"I see." 
"I'm glad you see. I thought you mightn't believe any of this, so 
when I called her this time I used the telephone answering machine to 
record the call." 
He went across to the telephone machine and fiddled and fumed 
with all its buttons for a while, because it was the one which was 
particularly recommended by Which magazine and is almost 
impossible to use without going mad. 
"Here it is," he said at last, wiping the sweat from his brow. 
The voice was thin and crackly with its journey to a geostationary 
satellite and back, but it was also hauntingly calm. 
"Perhaps I should explain," Arcane Jill Watson's voice said, "that 
the phone is in fact in a room that he never comes into. It's in the 
Asylum you see. Wonko the Sane does not like to enter the Asylum 
and so he does not. I feel you should know this because it may save 
you phoning. If you would like to meet him, this is very easily 
arranged. All you have to do is walk in. He will only meet people 
outside the Asylum." 
Arthur's voice, at its most mystified: "I'm sorry, I don't understand. 
Where is the asylum?" 
"Where is the Asylum?" Arcane Jill Watson again. "Have you ever 
read the instructions on a packet of toothpicks?" 
On the tape, Arthur's voice had to admit that he had not. 
"You may want to do that. You may find that it clarifies things for 
you a little. You may find that it indicates to you where the Asylum is. 
Thank you." 
The sound of the phone line went dead. Arthur turned the machine 
off. 
"Well, I suppose we can regard that as an invitation," he said with a 
shrug. "I actually managed to get the address from the guy on the 
science magazine." 
Fenchurch looked up at him again with a thoughtful frown, and 
looked at the tickets again. 
"Do you think it's worth it?" she said. 
"Well," said Arthur, "the one thing that everyone I spoke to agrees 
on, apart from the fact that they all thought he was barking mad, is 
that he does know more than any man living about dolphins." 
Chapter 29
"This is an important announcement. This is flight 121 to Los 
Angeles. If your travel plans today do not include Los Angeles, now 
would be the perfect time to disembark." 
Chapter 30
They rented a car in Los Angeles from one of the places that rents 
out cars that other people have thrown away. 
"Getting it to go round corners is a bit of a problem," said the guy 
behind the sunglasses as he handed them the keys, "sometimes it's 
simpler just to get out and find a car that's going in that direction." 
They stayed for one night in a hotel on Sunset Boulevard which 
someone had told them they would enjoy being puzzled by. 
"Everyone there is either English or odd or both. They've got a 
swimming pool where you can go and watch English rock stars 
reading Language, Truth and Logic for the photographers." 
It was true. There was one and that was exactly what he was doing. 
The garage attendant didn't think much of their car, but that was 
fine because they didn't either. 
Late in the evening they drove through the Hollywood hills along 
Mulholland Drive and stopped to look out first over the dazzling sea 
of floating light that is Los Angeles, and later stopped to look across 
the dazzling sea of floating light that is the San Fernando Valley. They 
agreed that the sense of dazzle stopped immediately at the back of 
their eyes and didn't touch any other part of them and came away 
strangely unsatisfied by the spectacle. As dramatic seas of light went, 
it was fine, but light is meant to illuminate something, and having 
driven through what this particularly dramatic sea of light was 
illuminating they didn't think much of it. 
They slept late and restlessly and awoke at lunchtime when it was 
stupidly hot. 
They drove out along the freeway to Santa Monica for their first 
look at the Pacific Ocean, the ocean which Wonko the Sane spent all 
his days and a good deal of his nights looking at. 
"Someone told me," said Fenchurch, "that they once overheard 
two old ladies on this beach, doing what we're doing, looking at the 
Pacific Ocean for the first time in their lives. And apparently, after a 
long pause, one of them said to the other, 'You know, it's not as big as 
I expected.'" 
Their mood lifted further as the sun began to move down the 
western half of the sky, and by the time they were back in their 
rattling car and driving towards a sunset that no one of any sensibility 
would dream of building a city like Los Angeles on front of, they were 
suddenly feeling astonishingly and irrationally happy and didn't even 
mind that the terrible old car radio would only play two stations, and 
those simultaneously. So what, they were both playing good rock and 
roll. 
"I know he will be able to help us," said Fenchurch determinedly. "I 
know he will. What's his name again, that he likes to be called?" 
"Wonko the Sane." 
"I know that he will be able to help us." 
Arthur wondered if he would and hoped that he would, and hoped 
that what Fenchurch had lost could be found here, on this Earth, 
whatever this Earth might prove to be. 
He hoped, as he had hoped continually and fervently since the time 
they had talked together on the banks of the Serpentine, that he 
would not be called upon to try to remember something that he had 
very firmly and deliberately buried in the furthest recesses of his 
memory, where he hoped it would cease to nag at him. 
In Santa Barbara they stopped at a fish restaurant in what seemed 
to be a converted warehouse. 
Fenchurch had red mullet and said it was delicious. 
Arthur had a swordfish steak and said it made him angry. 
He grabbed a passing waitress by the arm and berated her. 
"Why's this fish so bloody good?" he demanded, angrily. 
"Please excuse my friend," said Fenchurch to the startled waitress. 
"I think he's having a nice day at last." 
Chapter 31
If you took a couple of David Bowies and stuck one of the David 
Bowies on the top of the other David Bowie, then attached another 
David Bowie to the end of each of the arms of the upper of the first 
two David Bowies and wrapped the whole business up in a dirty 
beach robe you would then have something which didn't exactly look 
like John Watson, but which those who knew him would find 
hauntingly familiar. 
He was tall and he gangled. 
When he sat in his deckchair gazing at the Pacific, not so much with 
any kind of wild surmise any longer as with a peaceful deep dejection, 
it was a little difficult to tell exactly where the deckchair ended and he 
began, and you would hesitate to put your hand on, say, his forearm 
in case the whole structure suddenly collapsed with a snap and took 
your thumb off. 
But his smile when he turned it on you was quite remarkable. It 
seemed to be composed of all the worst things that life can do to you, 
but which, when he briefly reassembled them in that particular order 
on his face, made you suddenly fee, "Oh. Well that's all right then." 
When he spoke, you were glad that he used the smile that made 
you feel like that pretty often. 
"Oh yes," he said, "they come and see me. They sit right here. They 
sit right where you're sitting." 
He was talking of the angels with the golden beards and green 
wings and Dr. Scholl sandals. 
"They eat nachos which they say they can't get where they come 
from. They do a lot of coke and are very wonderful about a whole 
range of things." 
"Do they?" said Arthur. "Are they? So, er... when is this then? 
When do they come?" 
He gazed out at the Pacific as well. There were little sandpipers 
running along the margin of the shore which seemed to have this 
problem: they needed to find their food in the sand which a wave had 
just washed over, but they couldn't bear to get their feet wet. To deal 
with this problem they ran with an odd kind of movement as if they'd 
been constructed by somebody very clever in Switzerland. 
Fenchurch was sitting on the sand, idly drawing patterns in it with 
her fingers. 
"Weekends, mostly," said Wonko the Sane, "on little scooters. They 
are great machines." He smiled. 
"I see," said Arthur. "I see." 
A tiny cough from Fenchurch attracted his attention and he looked 
round at her. She had scratched a little stick figure drawing in the 
sand of the two of them in the clouds. For a moment he thought she 
was trying to get him excited, then he realized that she was rebuking 
him. "Who are we," she was saying, "to say he's mad?" 
His house was certainly peculiar, and since this was the first thing 
that Fenchurch and Arthur had encountered it would help to know 
what it was like. 
What it was like was this: 
It was inside out. 
Actually inside out, to the extent that they had to park on the 
carpet. 
All along what one would normally call the outer wall, which was 
decorated in a tasteful interior`designed pink, were bookshelves, also 
a couple of those odd three`legged tables with semi`circular tops 
which stand in such a way as to suggest that someone just dropped 
the wall straight through them, and pictures which were clearly 
designed to soothe. 
Where it got really odd was the roof. 
It folded back on itself like something that Maurits C. Escher, had 
he been given to hard nights on the town, which is no part of this 
narrative's purpose to suggest was the case, though it is sometimes 
hard, looking at his pictures, particularly the one with the awkward 
steps, not to wonder, might have dreamed up after having been on 
one, for the little chandeliers which should have been hanging inside 
were on the outside pointing up. 
Confusing. 
The sign above the front door said, "Come Outside", and so, 
nervously, they had. 
Inside, of course, was where the Outside was. Rough brickwork, 
nicely done painting, guttering in good repair, a garden path, a couple 
of small trees, some rooms leading off. 
And the inner walls stretched down, folded curiously, and opened 
at the end as if, by an optical illusion which would have had Maurits C. 
Escher frowning and wondering how it was done, to enclose the 
Pacific Ocean itself. 
"Hello," said John Watson, Wonko the Sane. 
Good, they thought to themselves, "Hello" is something we can 
cope with. 
"Hello," they said, and all surprisingly was smiles. 
For quite a while he seemed curiously reluctant to talk about the 
dolphins, looking oddly distracted and saying, "I forget..." whenever 
they were mentioned, and had shown them quite proudly round the 
eccentricities of his house. 
"It gives me pleasure," he said, "in a curious kind of way, and does 
nobody any harm," he continued, "that a competent optician couldn't 
correct." 
They liked him. He had an open, engaging quality and seemed able 
to mock himself before anybody else did. 
"Your wife," said Arthur, looking around, "mentioned some 
toothpicks." He said it with a hunted look, as if he was worried that 
she might suddenly leap out from behind the door and mention them 
again. 
Wonko the Sane laughed. It was a light easy laugh, and sounded 
like one he had used a lot before and was happy with. 
"Ah yes," he said, "that's to so with the day I finally realized that 
the world had gone totally mad and built the Asylum to put it in, poor 
thing, and hoped it would get better." 
This was the point at which Arthur began to feel a little nervous 
again. 
"Here," said Wonko the Sane, "we are outside the Asylum." He 
pointed again at the rough brickwork, the pointing and the guttering. 
"Go through that door," he pointed at the first door through which 
they had originally entered, "and you go into the Asylum. I've tried to 
decorate it nicely to keep the inmates happy, but there's very little 
one can do. I never go in there now myself. If ever I am tempted, 
which these days I rarely am, I simply look at the sign written over the 
door and shy away." 
"That one?" said Fenchurch, pointing, rather puzzled, at a blue 
plaque with some instructions written on it. 
"Yes. They are the words that finally turned me into the hermit I 
have now become. It was quite sudden. I saw them, and I knew what I 
had to do." 
The sign said: 
Hold stick near centre of its length. Moisten pointed end in mouth. 
Insert in tooth space, blunt end next to gum. Use gentle in`out motion. 
"It seemed to me," said Wonko the sane, "that any civilization that 
had so far lost its head as to need to include a set of detailed 
instructions for use in a packet of toothpicks, was no longer a 
civilization in which I could live and stay sane." 
He gazed out at the Pacific again, as if daring it to rave and gibber 
at him, but it lay there calmly and played with the sandpipers. 
"And in case it crossed your mind to wonder, as I can see how it 
possibly might, I am completely sane. Which is why I call myself 
Wonko the Sane, just to reassure people on this point. Wonko is what 
my mother called me when I was a kid and clumsy and knocked things 
over, and sane is what I am, and how," he added, with one of his 
smiles that made you feel, "Oh. Well that's all right then." "I intend to 
remain. Shall we go on to the beach and see what we have to talk 
about?" 
They went out on to the beach, which was where he started talking 
about angels with golden beards and green wings and Dr. Scholl 
sandals. 
"About the dolphins..." said Fenchurch gently, hopefully. 
"I can show you the sandals," said Wonko the Sane. 
"I wonder, do you know..." 
"Would you like me to show you," said Wonko the Sane, "the 
sandals? I have them. I'll get them. They are made by the Dr. Scholl 
company, and the angels say that they particularly suit the terrain 
they have to work in. They say they run a concession stand by the 
message. When I say I don't know what that means they say no, you 
don't, and laugh. Well, I'll get them anyway." 
As he walked back towards the inside, or the outside depending on 
how you looked at it, Arthur and Fenchurch looked at each other in a 
wondering and slightly desperate sort of way, then each shrugged and 
idly drew figures in the sand. 
"How are the feet today?" said Arthur quietly. 
"OK. It doesn't feel so odd in the sand. Or in the water. The water 
touches them perfectly. I just think this isn't our world." 
She shrugged. 
"What do you think he meant," she said, "by the message?" 
"I don't know," said Arthur, though the memory of a man called 
Prak who laughed at him continuously kept nagging at him. 
When Wonko returned he was carrying something that stunned 
Arthur. Not the sandals, they were perfectly ordinary wooden`
bottomed sandals. 
"I just thought you'd like to see," he said, "what angels wear on 
their feet. Just out of curiousity. I'm not trying to prove anything, by 
the way. I'm a scientist and I know what constitutes proof. But the 
reason I call myself by my childhood name is to remind myself that a 
scientist must also be absolutely like a child. If he sees a thing, he 
must say that he sees it, whether it was what he thought he was 
going to see or not. See first, think later, then test. But always see first. 
Otherwise you will only see what you were expecting. Most scientists 
forget that. I'll show you something to demonstrate that later. So, the
other reason I call myself Wonko the Sane is so that people will think I 
am a fool. That allows me to say what I see when I see it. You can't 
possibly be a scientist if you mind people thinking that you're a fool. 
Anyway, I also thought you might like to see this." 
This was the thing that Arthur had been stunned to see him 
carrying, for it was a wonderful silver`grey glass fish bowl, seemingly 
identical to the one in Arthur's bedroom. 
Arthur had been trying for some thirty seconds now, without 
success, to say, "Where did you get that?" sharply, and with a gasp in 
his voice. 
Finally his time had come, but he missed it by a millisecond. 
"Where did you get that?" said Fenchurch, sharply and with a gasp 
in her voice. 
Arthur glanced at Fenchurch sharply and with a gasp in his voice 
said, "What? Have you seen one of these before?" 
"Yes," she said, "I've got one. Or at least I did have. Russell nicked it 
to put his golfballs in. I don't know where it came from, just that I was 
angry with Russell for nicking it. Why, have you got one?" 
"Yes, it was..." 
They both became aware that Wonko the Sane was glancing 
sharply backwards and forwards between them, and trying to get a 
gasp in edgeways. 
"You have one of those too?" he said to both of them. 
"Yes." They both said it. 
He looked long and calmly at each of them, then he held up the 
bowl to catch the light of the Californian sun. 
The bowl seemed almost to sing with the sun, to chime with the 
intensity of its light, and cast darkly brilliant rainbows around the
sand and upon them. He turned it, and turned it. They could see quite 
clearly in the fine tracery of its etchwork the words "So Long, and 
Thanks For All The Fish." 
"Do you know," asked Wonko quietly, "what it is?" 
They each shook their heads slowly, and with wonder, almost 
hypnotized by the flashing of the lightning shadows in the grey glass. 
"It is a farewell gift from the dolphins," said Wonko in a low quiet 
voice, "the dolphins whom I loved and studied, and swam with, and 
fed with fish, and even tried to learn their language, a task which they 
seemed to make impossibly difficult, considering the fact that I now 
realize they were perfectly capable of communicating in ours if they 
decided they wanted to." 
He shook his head with a slow, slow smile, and then looked again 
at Fenchurch, and then at Arthur. 
"Have you..." he said to Arthur, "what have you done with yours? 
May I ask you that?" 
"Er, I keep a fish in it," said Arthur, slightly embarrassed. "I 
happened to have this fish I was wondering what to do with, and, er, 
there was this bowl." He tailed off. 
"You've done nothing else? No," he said, "if you had, you would 
know." He shook his head again. 
"My wife kept wheatgerm in ours," resumed Wonko, with some 
new tone in his voice, "until last night..." 
"What," said Arthur slowly and hushedly, "happened last night?" 
"We ran out of wheatgerm," said Wonko, evenly. "My wife," he 
added, "has gone to get some more." He seemed lost with his own 
thoughts for a moment. 
"And what happened then?" said Fenchurch, in the same 
breathless tone. 
"I washed it," said Wonko. "I washed it very carefully, very very 
carefully, removing every last speck of wheatgerm, then I dried it 
slowly with a lint`free cloth, slowly, carefully, turning it over and over. 
Then I held it to my ear. Have you... have you held one to your ear?" 
They both shook their heads, again slowly, again dumbly. 
"Perhaps," he said, "you should." 
Chapter 32
The deep roar of the ocean. 
The break of waves on further shores than thought can find. 
The silent thunders of the deep. 
And from among it, voices calling, and yet not voices, humming 
trillings, wordlings, the half`articulated songs of thought. 
Greetings, waves of greetings, sliding back down into the 
inarticulate, words breaking together. 
A crash of sorrow on the shores of Earth. 
Waves of joy on ʹ where? A world indescribably found, 
indescribably arrived at, indescribably wet, a song of water. 
A fugue of voices now, clamouring explanations, of a disaster 
unavertable, a world to be destroyed, a surge of helplessness, a 
spasm of despair, a dying fall, again the break of words. 
And then the fling of hope, the finding of a shadow Earth in the 
implications of enfolded time, submerged dimensions, the pull of 
parallels, the deep pull, the spin of will, the hurl and split of it, the 
flight. A new Earth pulled into replacement, the dolphins gone. 
Then stunningly a single voice, quite clear. 
"This bowl was brought to you by the Campaign to Save the 
Humans. We bid you farewell." 
And then the sound of long, heavy, perfectly grey bodies rolling 
away into an unknown fathomless deep, quietly giggling. 
Chapter 33
That night they stayed Outside the Asylum and watched TV from 
inside it. 
"This is what I wanted you to see," said Wonko the Sane when the 
news came around again, "an old colleague of mine. He's over in your 
country running an investigation. Just watch." 
It was a press conference. 
"I'm afraid I can't comment on the name Rain God at this present 
time, and we are calling him an example of a Spontaneous Para`
Causal Meteorological Phenomenon." 
"Can you tell us what that means?" 
"I'm not altogether sure. Let's be straight here. If we find 
something we can't understand we like to call it something you can't 
understand, or indeed pronounce. I mean if we just let you go around 
calling him a Rain God, then that suggests that you know something 
we don't, and I'm afraid we couldn't have that. 
"No, first we have to call it something which says it's ours, not 
yours, then we set about finding some way of proving it's not what 
you said it is, but something we say it is. 
"And if it turns out that you're right, you'll still be wrong, because 
we will simply call him a... er 'Supernormal...' ʹ not paranormal or 
supernatural because you think you know what those mean now, no, 
a 'Supernormal Incremental Precipitation Inducer'. We'll probably 
want to shove a 'Quasi' in there somewhere to protect ourselves. Rain 
God  Huh, never heard such nonsense in my life. Admittedly, you 
wouldn't catch me going on holiday with him. Thanks, that'll be all for 
now, other than to say 'Hi ' to Wonko if he's watching." 
Chapter 34
On the way home there was a woman sitting next to them on the 
plane who was looking at them rather oddly. 
They talked quietly to themselves. 
"I still have to know," said Fenchurch, "and I strongly feel that you 
know something that you're not telling me." 
Arthur sighed and took out a piece of paper. 
"Do you have a pencil?" he said. She dug around and found one. 
"What are you doing, sweetheart?" she said, after he had spent 
twenty minutes frowning, chewing the pencil, scribbling on the paper, 
crossing things out, scribbling again, chewing the pencil again and 
grunting irritably to himself. 
"Trying to remember an address someone once gave me." 
"Your life would be an awful lot simpler," she said, "if you bought 
yourself an address book." 
Finally he passed the paper to her. 
"You look after it," he said. 
She looked at it. Among all the scratchings and crossings out were 
the words "Quentulus Quazgar Mountains. Sevorbeupstry. Planet of 
Preliumtarn. Sun`Zarss. Galactic Sector QQ7 Active J Gamma." 
"And what's there?" 
"Apparently," said Arthur, "it's God's Final Message to His 
Creation." 
"That sounds a bit more like it," said Fenchurch. "How do we get 
there?" 
"You really...?" 
"Yes," said Fenchurch firmly, "I really want to know." 
Arthur looked out of the scratchy little perspex window at the open 
sky outside. 
"Excuse me," said the woman who had been looking at them rather 
oddly, suddenly, "I hope you don't think I'm rude. I get so bored on 
these long flights, it's nice to talk to somebody. My name's Enid 
Kapelsen, I'm from Boston. Tell me, do you fly a lot?" 
Chapter 35
They went to Arthur's house in the West Country, shoved a couple 
of towels and stuff in a bag, and then sat down to do what every 
Galactic hitch hiker ends up spending most of his time doing. 
They waited for a flying saucer to come by. 
"Friend of mine did this for fifteen years," said Arthur one night as 
they sat forlornly watching the sky. 
"Who was that?" 
"Called Ford Prefect." 
He caught himself doing something he had never really expected to 
do again. 
He wondered where Ford Prefect was. 
By an extraordinary coincidence, the following day there were two 
reports in the paper, one concerning the most astonishing incidents 
with a flying saucer, and the other about a series of unseemly riots in 
pubs. 
Ford Prefect turned up the day after that looking hung over and 
complaining that Arthur never answered the phone. 
In fact he looked extremely ill, not merely as if he'd been pulled 
through a hedge backwards, but as if the hedge was being 
simultaneously pulled backwards through a combine harvester. He 
staggered into Arthur's sitting room, waving aside all offers of support, 
which was an error, because the effort caused him to lose his balance 
altogether and Arthur had eventually to drag him to the sofa. 
"Thank you," said Ford, "thank you very much. Have you..." he said, 
and fell asleep for three hours. 
"... the faintest idea" he continued suddenly, when he revived, 
"how hard it is to tap into the British phone system from the Pleiades? 
I can see that you haven't, so I'll tell you," he said, "over the very large 
mug of black coffee that you are about to make me." 
He followed Arthur wobbily into the kitchen. 
"Stupid operators keep asking you where you're calling from and 
you try and tell them Letchworth and they say you couldn't be if 
you're coming in on that circuit. What are you doing?" 
"Making you some black coffee." 
"Oh." Ford seemed oddly disappointed. He looked about the place 
forlornly. 
"What's this?" he said. 
"Rice Crispies." 
"And this?" 
"Paprika." 
"I see," said Ford, solemnly, and put the two items back down, one 
on top of the other, but that didn't seem to balance properly, so he 
put the other on top of the one and that seemed to work. 
"A little space`lagged," he said. "What was I saying?" 
"About not phoning from Letchworth." 
"I wasn't. I explained this to the lady. 'Bugger Letchworth,' I said, 'if 
that's your attitude. I am in fact calling from a sales scoutship of the 
Sirius Cybernetics Corporation, currently on the sub`light`speed leg of 
a journey between the stars known on your world, though not 
necessarily to you, dear lady.' ʹ I said 'dear lady'," explained Ford 
Prefect, "because I didn't want her to be offended by my implication 
that she was an ignorant cretin..." 
"Tactful," said Arthur Dent. 
"Exactly," said Ford, "tactful." 
He frowned. 
"Space`lag," he said, "is very bad for sub`clauses. You'll have to 
assist me again," he continued, "by reminding me what I was talking 
about." 
"'Between the stars,'" said Arthur, "'known on your world, though 
not necessarily to you, dear lady, as...'" 
"'Pleiades Epsilon and Pleiades Zeta,'" concluded Ford triumphantly. 
"This conversation lark is quite gas isn't it?" 
"Have some coffee." 
"Thank you, no. 'And the reason,' I said, 'why I am bothering you 
with it rather than just dialling direct as I could, because we have 
some pretty sophisticated telecommunications equipment out here in 
the Pleiades, I can tell you, is that the penny pinching son of a 
starbeast piloting this son of a starbeast spaceship insists that I call 
collect. Can you believe that?'" 
"And could she?" 
"I don't know. She had hung up," said Ford, "by this time. So  What 
do you suppose," he asked fiercely, "I did next?" 
"I've no idea, Ford," said Arthur. 
"Pity," said Ford, "I was hoping you could remind me. I really hate 
those guys you know. They really are the creeps of the cosmos, 
buzzing around the celestial infinite with their junky little machines 
that never work properly or, when they do, perform functions that no 
sane man would require of them and," he added savagely, "go beep 
to tell you when they've done it " 
This was perfectly true, and a very respectable view widely held by 
right thinking people, who are largely recognizable as being right 
thinking people by the mere fact that they hold this view. 
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, in a moment of reasoned 
lucidity which is almost unique among its current tally of five million, 
nine hundred and seventy`five thousand, five hundred and nine pages, 
says of the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation product that "it is very easy 
to be blinded to the essential uselessness of them by the sense of 
achievement you get from getting them to work at all. 
"In other words ʹ and this is the rock solid principle on which the 
whole of the Corporation's Galaxy`wide success is founded ʹ their 
fundamental design flaws are completely hidden by their superficial 
design flaws." 
"And this guy," ranted Ford, "was on a drive to sell more of them  
His five`year mission to seek out and explore strange new worlds, and 
sell Advanced Music Substitute Systems to their restaurants, elevators 
and wine bars  Or if they didn't have restaurants, elevators and wine 
bars yet, to artificially accelerate their civilization growth until they 
bloody well did have  Where's that coffee " 
"I threw it away." 
"Make some more. I have now remembered what I did next. I 
saved civilization as we know it. I knew it was something like that." 
He stumbled determinedly back into the sitting room, where he 
seemed to carry on talking to himself, tripping over the furniture and 
making beep beep noises. 
A couple of minutes later, wearing his very placid face, Arthur 
followed him. 
Ford looked stunned. 
"Where have you been?" he demanded. 
"Making some coffee," said Arthur, still wearing his very placid face. 
He had long ago realized that the only way of being in Ford's company 
successfully was to keep a large stock of very placid faces and wear 
them at all times. 
"You missed the best bit " raged Ford. "You missed the bit where I 
jumped the guy  Now," he said, "I shall have to jump him, all over 
him " 
He hurled himself recklessly at a chair and broke it. 
"It was better," he said sullenly, "last time," and waved vaguely in 
the direction of another broken chair which he had already got 
trussed up on the dining table. 
"I see," said Arthur, casting a placid eye over the trussed up 
wreckage, "and, er, what are all the ice cubes for?" 
"What?" screamed Ford. "What? You missed that bit too? That's 
the suspended animation facility  I put the guy in the suspended 
animation facility. Well I had to didn't I?" 
"So it would seem," said Arthur, in his placid voice. 
"Don't touch that   " yelled Ford. 
Arthur, who was about to replace the phone, which was for some 
mysterious reason lying on the table, off the hook, paused, placidly. 
"OK," said Ford, calming down, "listen to it." 
Arthur put the phone to his ear. 
"It's the speaking clock," he said. 
"Beep, beep, beep," said Ford, "is exactly what is being heard all 
over that guy's ship, while he sleeps, in the ice, going slowly round a 
little`known moon of Sesefras Magna. The London Speaking Clock " 
"I see," said Arthur again, and decided that now was the time to 
ask the big one. 
"Why?" he said, placidly. 
"With a bit of luck," said Ford, "the phone bill will bankrupt the 
buggers." 
He threw himself, sweating, on to the sofa. 
"Anyway," he said, "dramatic arrival don't you think?" 
Chapter 36
The flying saucer in which Ford Prefect had stowed away had 
stunned the world. 
Finally there was no doubt, no possibility of mistake, no 
hallucinations, no mysterious CIA agents found floating in reservoirs. 
This time it was real, it was definite. It was quite definitely definite. 
It had come down with a wonderful disregard for anything beneath 
it and crushed a large area of some of the most expensive real estate 
in the world, including much of Harrods. 
The thing was massive, nearly a mile across, some said, dull silver in 
colour, pitted, scorched and disfigured with the scars of unnumbered 
vicious space battles fought with savage forces by the light of suns 
unknown to man. 
A hatchway opened, crashed down through the Harrods Food Halls, 
demolished Harvey Nicholls, and with a final grinding scream of 
tortured architecture, toppled the Sheraton Park Tower. 
After a long, heart`stopping moment of internal crashes and 
grumbles of rending machinery, there marched from it, down the 
ramp, an immense silver robot, a hundred feet tall. 
It held up a hand. 
"I come in peace," it said, adding after a long moment of further 
grinding, "take me to your Lizard." 
Ford Prefect, of course, had an explanation for this, as he sat with 
Arthur and watched the non`stop frenetic news reports on the 
television, none of which had anything to say other than to record 
that the thing had done this amount of damage which was valued at 
that amount of billions of pounds and had killed this totally other 
number of people, and then say it again, because the robot was doing 
nothing more than standing there, swaying very slightly, and emitting 
short incomprehensible error messages. 
"It comes from a very ancient democracy, you see..." 
"You mean, it comes from a world of lizards?" 
"No," said Ford, who by this time was a little more rational and 
coherent than he had been, having finally had the coffee forced down 
him, "nothing so simple. Nothing anything like so straightforward. On 
its world, the people are people. The leaders are lizards. The people 
hate the lizards and the lizards role the people." 
"Odd," said Arthur, "I thought you said it was a democracy." 
"I did," said Ford. "It is." 
"So," said Arthur, hoping he wasn't sounding ridiculously obtuse, 
"why don't people get rid of the lizards?" 
"It honestly doesn't occur to them," said Ford. "They've all got the 
vote, so they all pretty much assume that the government they've 
voted in more or less approximates to the government they want." 
"You mean they actually vote for the lizards?" 
"Oh yes," said Ford with a shrug, "of course."
"But," said Arthur, going for the big one again, "why?" 
"Because if they didn't vote for a lizard," said Ford, "the wrong 
lizard might get in. Got any gin?" 
"What?" 
"I said," said Ford, with an increasing air of urgency creeping into 
his voice, "have you got any gin?" 
"I'll look. Tell me about the lizards." 
Ford shrugged again. 
"Some people say that the lizards are the best thing that ever 
happened to them," he said. "They're completely wrong of course, 
completely and utterly wrong, but someone's got to say it." 
"But that's terrible," said Arthur. 
"Listen, bud," said Ford, "if I had one Altairan dollar for every time I 
heard one bit of the Universe look at another bit of the Universe and 
say 'That's terrible' I wouldn't be sitting here like a lemon looking for a 
gin. But I haven't and I am. Anyway, what are you looking so placid 
and moon`eyed for? Are you in love?" 
Arthur said yes, he was, and said it placidly. 
"With someone who knows where the gin bottle is? Do I get to 
meet her?" 
He did because Fenchurch came in at that moment with a pile of 
newspapers she'd been into the village to buy. She stopped in 
astonishment at the wreckage on the table and the wreckage from 
Betelgeuse on the sofa. 
"Where's the gin?" said Ford to Fenchurch. And to Arthur, "What 
happened to Trillian by the way?" 
"Er, this is Fenchurch," said Arthur, awkwardly. "There was nothing 
with Trillian, you must have seen her last." 
"Oh, yeah," said Ford, "she went off with Zaphod somewhere. They 
had some kids or something. At least," he added, "I think that's what 
they were. Zaphod's calmed down a lot you know." 
"Really?" said Arthur, clustering hurriedly round Fenchurch to 
relieve her of the shopping. 
"Yeah," said Ford, "at least one of his heads is now saner than an 
emu on acid." 
"Arthur, who is this?" said Fenchurch. 
"Ford Prefect," said Arthur. "I may have mentioned him in passing." 
Chapter 37
For a total of three days and nights the giant silver robot stood in 
stunned amazement straddling the remains of Knightsbridge, swaying 
slightly and trying to work out a number of things. 
Government deputations came to see it, ranting journalists by the 
truckload asked each other questions on the air about what they 
thought of it, flights of fighter bombers tried pathetically to attack it ʹ
but no lizards appeared. It scanned the horizon slowly. 
At night it was at its most spectacular, floodlit by the teams of 
television crews who covered it continuously as it continuously did 
nothing. 
It thought and thought and eventually reached a conclusion. 
It would have to send out its service robots. 
It should have thought of that before, but it was having a number 
of problems. 
The tiny flying robots came screeching out of the hatchway one 
afternoon in a terrifying cloud of metal. They roamed the surrounding 
terrain, frantically attacking some things and defending others. 
One of them at last found a pet shop with some lizards, but it 
instantly defended the pet shop for democracy so savagely that little 
in the area survived. 
A turning point came when a crack team of flying screechers 
discovered the Zoo in Regent's Park, and most particularly the reptile 
house. 
Learning a little caution from their previous mistakes in the 
petshop, the flying drills and fretsaws brought some of the larger and 
fatter iguanas to the giant silver robot, who tried to conduct high`
level talks with them. 
Eventually the robot announced to the world that despite the full, 
frank and wide`ranging exchange of views the high level talks had 
broken down, the lizards had been retired, and that it, the robot 
would take a short holiday somewhere, and for some reason selected 
Bournemouth. 
Ford Prefect, watching it on TV, nodded, laughed, and had another 
beer. 
Immediate preparations were made for its departure. 
The flying toolkits screeched and sawed and drilled and fried things 
with light throughout that day and all through the night time, and in 
the morning, stunningly, a giant mobile gantry started to roll 
westwards on several roads simultaneously with the robot standing 
on it, supported within the gantry. 
Westward it crawled, like a strange carnival buzzed around by its 
servants and helicopters and news coaches, scything through the land 
until at last it came to Bournemouth, where the robot slowly freed 
itself from it transport system's embraces and went and lay for ten 
days on the beach. 
It was, of course, by far the most exciting thing that had ever 
happened to Bournemouth. 
Crowds gathered daily along the perimeter which was staked out 
and guarded as the robot's recreation area, and tried to see what it 
was doing. 
It was doing nothing. It was lying on the beach. It was lying a little 
awkwardly on its face. 
It was a journalist from a local paper who, late one night, managed 
to do what no one else in the world had so far managed, which was to 
strike up a brief intelligible conversation with one of the service 
robots guarding the perimeter. 
It was an extraordinary breakthrough. 
"I think there's a story in it," confided the journalist over a cigarette 
shared through the steel link fence, "but it needs a good local angle. 
I've got a little list of questions here," he went on, rummaging 
awkwardly in an inner pocket, "perhaps you could get him, it, 
whatever you call him, to run through them quickly." 
The little flying ratchet screwdriver said it would see what it cold 
do and screeched off. 
A reply was never forthcoming. 
Curiously, however, the questions on the piece of paper more or 
less exactly matched the questions that were going through the 
massive battle`scarred industrial quality circuits of the robot's mind. 
They were these: 
"How do you feel about being a robot?" 
"How does it feel to be from outer space?" and 
"How do you like Bournemouth?" 
Early the following day things started to be packed up and within a 
few days it became apparent that the robot was preparing to leave 
for good. 
"The point is," said Fenchurch to Ford, "can you get us on board?" 
Ford looked wildly at his watch. 
"I have some serious unfinished business to attend to," he 
exclaimed. 
Chapter 38
Crowds thronged as close as they could to the giant silver craft, 
which wasn't very. The immediate perimeter was fenced off and 
patrolled by the tiny flying service robots. Staked out around that was 
the army, who had been completely unable to breach that inner 
perimeter, but were damned if anybody was going to breach them. 
They in turn were surrounded by a cordon of police, though whether 
they were there to protect the public from the army or the army from 
the public, or to guarantee the giant ship's diplomatic immunity and 
prevent it getting parking tickets was entirely unclear and the subject 
of much debate. 
The inner perimeter fence was now being dismantled. The army 
stirred uncomfortably, uncertain of how to react to the fact that the 
reason for their being there seemed as if it was simply going to get up 
and go. 
The giant robot had lurched back aboard the ship at lunchtime, and 
now it was five o'clock in the afternoon and no further sign had been 
seen of it. Much had been heard ʹ more grindings and rumblings from 
deep within the craft, the music of a million hideous malfunctions; 
but the sense of tense expectation among the crowd was born of the 
fact that they tensely expected to be disappointed. This wonderful 
extraordinary thing had come into their lives, an now it was simply 
going to go without them. 
Two people were particularly aware of this sensation. Arthur and 
Fenchurch scanned the crowd anxiously, unable to find Ford Prefect 
in it anywhere, or any sign that he had the slightest intention of being 
there. 
"How reliable is he?" asked Fenchurch in a sinking voice. 
"How reliable?" said Arthur. He gave a hollow laugh. "How shallow 
is the ocean?" he said. "How cold is the sun?" 
The last parts of the robot's gantry transport were being carried on 
board, and the few remaining sections of the perimeter fence were 
now stacked at the bottom of the ramp waiting to follow them. The 
soldiers on guard round the ramp bristled meaningfully, orders were 
barked back and forth, hurried conferences were held, but nothing, of 
course, could be done about any of it. 
Hopelessly, and with no clear plan now, Arthur and Fenchurch 
pushed forward through the crowd, but since the whole crowd was 
also trying to push forward through the crowd, this got them 
nowhere. 
And within a few minutes more nothing remained outside the ship, 
every last link of the fence was aboard. A couple of flying fret saws 
and a spirit level seemed to do one last check around the site, and 
then screamed in through the giant hatchway themselves. 
A few seconds passed. 
The sounds of mechanical disarray from within changed in intensity, 
and slowly, heavily, the huge steel ramp began to lift itself back out of 
the Harrods Food Halls. The sound that accompanied it was the sound 
of thousands of tense, excited people being completely ignored. 
"Hold it " 
A megaphone barked from a taxi which screeched to a halt on the 
edge of the milling crowd. 
"There has been," barked the megaphone, "a major scientific 
break`in  Through. Breakthrough," it corrected itself. The door flew 
open and a small man from somewhere in the vicinity of Betelgeuse 
leapt out wearing a white coat. 
"Hold it " he shouted again, and this time brandished a short squad 
black rod with lights on it. The lights winked briefly, the ramp paused 
in its ascent, and then in obedience to the signals from the Thumb 
(which half the electronic engineers in the galaxy are constantly trying 
to find fresh ways of jamming, while the other half are constantly 
trying to find fresh ways of jamming the jamming signals), slowly 
ground its way downwards again. 
Ford Prefect grabbed his megaphone from out of the taxi and 
started bawling at the crowd through it. 
"Make way," he shouted, "make way, please, this is a major 
scientific breakthrough. You and you, get the equipment from the 
taxi." 
Completely at random he pointed at Arthur and Fenchurch, who 
wrestled their way back out of the crowd and clustered urgently 
round the taxi. 
"All right, I want you to clear a passage, please, for some important 
pieces of scientific equipment," boomed Ford. "Just everybody keep 
calm. It's all under control, there's nothing to see. It is merely a major 
scientific breakthrough. Keep calm now. Important scientific 
equipment. Clear the way." 
Hungry for new excitement, delighted at this sudden reprieve from 
disappointment, the crowd enthusiastically fell back and started to 
open up. 
Arthur was a little surprised to see what was printed on the boxes 
of important scientific equipment in the back of the taxi. 
"Hang your coat over them," he muttered to Fenchurch as he 
heaved them out to her. Hurriedly he manoeuvred out the large 
supermarket trolley that was also jammed against the back seat. It 
clattered to the ground, and together they loaded the boxes into it. 
"Clear a path, please," shouted Ford again. "Everything's under 
proper scientific control." 
"He said you'd pay," said the taxi`driver to Arthur, who dug out 
some notes and paid him. There was the distant sound of police 
sirens. 
"Move along there," shouted Ford, "and no one will get hurt." 
The crowd surged and closed behind them again, as frantically they 
pushed and hauled the rattling supermarket trolley through the 
rubble towards the ramp. 
"It's all right," Ford continued to bellow. "There's nothing to see, 
it's all over. None of this is actually happening." 
"Clear the way, please," boomed a police megaphone from the 
back of the crowd. "There's been a break`in, clear the way." 
"Breakthrough," yelled Ford in competition. "A scientific 
breakthrough " 
"This is the police  Clear the way " 
"Scientific equipment  Clear the way " 
"Police  Let us through " 
"Walkmen " yelled Ford, and pulled half a dozen miniature tape 
players from his pockets and tossed them into the crowd. The 
resulting seconds of utter confusion allowed them to get the 
supermarket trolley to the edge of the ramp, and to haul it up on to 
the lip of it. 
"Hold tight," muttered Ford, and released a button on his 
Electronic Thumb. Beneath them, the huge ramp juddered and began 
slowly to heave its way upwards. 
"Ok, kids," he said as the milling crowd dropped away beneath 
them and they started to lurch their way along the tilting ramp into 
the bowels of the ship, "looks like we're on our way." 
Chapter 39
Arthur Dent was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound 
of gunfire. 
Being careful not to wake Fenchurch, who was still managing to 
sleep fitfully, he slid his way out of the maintenance hatchway which 
they had fashioned into a kind of bunk for themselves, slung himself 
down the access ladder and prowled the corridors moodily. 
They were claustrophobic and ill`lit. The lighting circuits buzzed 
annoyingly. 
This wasn't it, though. 
He paused and leaned backwards as a flying power drill flew past 
him down the dim corridor with a nasty screech, occasionally clanging 
against the walls like a confused bee as it did so. 
That wasn't it either. 
He clambered through a bulkhead door and found himself in a 
larger corridor. Acrid smoke was drifting up from one end so he 
walked towards the other. 
He came to an observation monitor let into the wall behind a plate 
of toughened but still badly scratched perspex. 
"Would you turn it down please?" he said to Ford Prefect who was 
crouching in front of it in the middle of a pile of bits of video 
equipment he'd taken from a shop window in Tottenham Court Road, 
having first hurled a small brick through it, and also a nasty heap of 
empty beer cans. 
"Shhhh " hissed Ford, and peered with manic concentration at the 
screen. He was watching The Magnificent Seven. 
"Just a bit," said Arthur. 
"No " shouted Ford. "We're just getting to the good bit  Listen, I 
finally got it all sorted out, voltage levels, line conversion, everything, 
and this is the good bit " 
With a sigh and a headache, Arthur sat down beside him and 
watched the good bit. He listened to Ford's whoops and yells and 
"yeehay "s as placidly as he could. 
"Ford," he said eventually, when it was all over, and Ford was 
hunting through a stack of cassettes for the tape of Casablanca, "how 
come, if..." 
"This is the big one," said Ford. "This is the one I came back for. Do 
you realize I never saw it all through? Always I missed the end. I saw 
half of it again the night before the Vogons came. When they blew 
the place up I thought I'd never get to see it. Hey, what happened 
with all that anyway?" 
"Just life," said Arthur, and plucked a beer from a six`pack. 
"Oh, that again," said Ford. "I thought it might be something like 
that. I prefer this stuff," he said as Rick's Bar flickered on to the screen. 
"How come if what?" 
"What?" 
"You started to say, 'how come if...'" 
"How come if you're so rude about the Earth, that you... oh never 
mind, let's just watch the movie." 
"Exactly," said Ford. 
Chapter 40
There remains little still to tell. 
Beyond what used to be known as the Limitless Lightfields of 
Flanux until the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine were discovered 
lying behind them, lie the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine. Within 
the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine lies the star named Zarss, 
around which orbits the planet Preliumtarn in which is the land of 
Sevorbeupstry, and it was to the land of Sevorbeupstry that Arthur 
and Fenchurch came at last, a little tired by the journey. 
And in the land of Sevorbeupstry, they came to the Great Red Plain 
of Rars, which was bounded on the South side by the Quentulus 
Quazgar Mountains, on the further side of which, according to the 
dying words of Prak, they would find in thirty`foot`high letters of fire 
God's Final Message to His Creation. 
According to Prak, if Arthur's memory saved him right, the place 
was guarded by the Lajestic Vantrashell of Lob, and so, after a manner, 
it proved to be. He was a little man in a strange hat and he sold them 
a ticket. 
"Keep to the left, please," he said, "keep to the left," and hurried 
on past them on a little scooter. 
They realized they were not the first to pass that way, for the path 
that led around the left of the Great Plain was well`worn and dotted 
with booths. At one they bought a box of fudge, which had been 
baked in an oven in a cave in the mountain, which was heated by the 
fire of the letters that formed God's Final Message to His Creation. At 
another they bought some postcards. The letters had been blurred 
with an airbrush, "so as not to spoil the Big Surprise " it said on the 
reverse. 
"Do you know what the message is?" they asked the wizened little 
lady in the booth. 
"Oh yes," she piped cheerily, "oh yes " 
She waved them on. 
Every twenty miles or so there was a little stone hut with showers 
and sanitary facilities, but the going was tough, and the high sun 
baked down on the Great Red Plain, and the Great Red Plain rippled 
in the heat. 
"Is it possible," asked Arthur at one of the larger booths, "to rent 
one of those little scooters? Like the one Lajestic Ventrawhatsit had." 
"The scooters," said the little lady who was serving at an ice cream 
bar, "are not for the devout." 
"Oh well, that's easy then," said Fenchurch, "we're not particularly 
devout. We're just interested." 
"Then you must turn back now," said the little lady severely, and 
when they demurred, sold them a couple of Final Message sunhats 
and a photograph of themselves with their arms tight around each 
other on the Great Red Plain of Rars. 
They drank a couple of sodas in the shade of the booth and then 
trudged out into the sun again. 
"We're running out of border cream," said Fenchurch after a few 
more miles. "We can go to the next booth, or we can return to the 
previous one which is nearer, but means we have to retrace our steps 
again." 
They stared ahead at the distant black speck winking in the heat 
haze; they looked behind themselves. They elected to go on. 
They then discovered that they were not only not the first ones to 
make this journey, but that they were not the only ones making it 
now. 
Some way ahead of them an awkward low shape was heaving itself 
wretchedly along the ground, stumbling painfully slowly, half`limping, 
half`crawling. 
It was moving so slowly that before too long they caught the 
creature up and could see that it was made of worn, scarred and 
twisted metal. 
It groaned at them as they approached it, collapsing in the hot dry 
dust. 
"So much time," it groaned, "oh so much time. And pain as well, so 
much of that, and so much time to suffer it in too. One or the other 
on its own I could probably manage. It's the two together that really 
get me down. Oh hello, you again." 
"Marvin?" said Arthur sharply, crouching down beside it. "Is that 
you?" 
"You were always one," groaned the aged husk of the robot, "for 
the super`intelligent question, weren't you?" 
"What is it?" whispered Fenchurch in alarm, crouching behind 
Arthur, and grasping on to his arm. "He's sort of an old friend," said 
Arthur. "I..." 
"Friend " croaked the robot pathetically. The word died away in a 
kind of crackle and flakes of rust fell out of its mouth. "You'll have to 
excuse me while I try and remember what the word means. My 
memory banks are not what they were you know, and any word 
which falls into disuse for a few zillion years has to get shifted down 
into auxiliary memory back`up. Ah, here it comes." 
The robot's battered head snapped up a bit as if in thought. 
"Hmm," he said, "what a curious concept." 
He thought a little longer. 
"No," he said at last, "don't think I ever came across one of those. 
Sorry, can't help you there." 
He scraped a knee along pathetically in the dust, an then tried to 
twist himself up on his misshapen elbows. 
"Is there any last service you would like me to perform for you 
perhaps?" he asked in a kind of hollow rattle. "A piece of paper that 
perhaps you would like me to pick up for you? Or maybe you would 
like me," he continued, "to open a door?" 
His head scratched round in its rusty neck bearings and seemed to 
scan the distant horizon. 
"Don't seem to be any doors around at present," he said, "but I'm 
sure that if we waited long enough, someone would build one. And 
then," he said slowly twisting his head around to see Arthur again, "I 
could open it for you. I'm quite used to waiting you know." 
"Arthur," hissed Fenchurch in his ear sharply, "you never told me of 
this. What have you done to this poor creature?" 
"Nothing," insisted Arthur sadly, "he's always like this..." 
"Ha " snapped Marvin. "Ha " he repeated. "What do you know of 
always? You say 'always' to me, who, because of the silly little errands 
your organic lifeforms keep on sending me through time on, am now 
thirty`seven times older than the Universe itself? Pick your words 
with a little more care," he coughed, "and tact." 
He rasped his way through a coughing fit and resumed. 
"Leave me," he said, "go on ahead, leave me to struggle painfully 
on my way. My time at last has nearly come. My race is nearly run. I 
fully expect," he said, feebly waving them on with a broken finger, "to 
come in last. It would be fitting. Here I am, brain the size..." 
Between them they picked him up despite his feeble protests and 
insults. The metal was so hot it nearly blistered their fingers, but he 
weighed surprisingly little, and hung limply between their arms. 
They carried him with them along the path that ran along the left 
of the Great Red Plain of Rars toward the encircling mountains of 
Quentulus Quazgar. 
Arthur attempted to explain to Fenchurch, but was too often 
interrupted by Marvin's dolorous cybernetic ravings. 
They tried to see if they could get him some spare parts at one of 
the booths, but Marvin would have none of it. 
"I'm all spare parts," he droned. 
"Let me be " he groaned. 
"Every part of me," he moaned, "has been replaced at least fifty 
times... except..." He seemed almost imperceptibly to brighten for a 
moment. His head bobbed between them with the effort of memory. 
"Do you remember, the first time you ever met me," he said at last to 
Arthur. "I had been given the intellect`stretching task of taking you up 
to the bridge? I mentioned to you that I had this terrible pain in all the 
diodes down my left side? That I had asked for them to be replaced 
but they never were?" 
He left a longish pause before he continued. They carried him on 
between them, under the baking sun that hardly ever seemed to 
move, let alone set. 
"See if you can guess," said Marvin, when he judged that the pause 
had become embarrassing enough, "which parts of me were never 
replaced? Go on, see if you can guess. 
"Ouch," he added, "ouch, ouch, ouch, ouch, ouch." 
At last they reached the last of the little booths, set down Marvin 
between them and rested in the shade. Fenchurch bought some 
cufflinks for Russell, cufflinks that had set in them little polished 
pebbles which had been picked up from the Quentulus Quazgar 
Mountains, directly underneath the letters of fire in which was 
written God's Final Message to His Creation. 
Arthur flipped through a little rack of devotional tracts on the 
counter, little meditations on the meaning of the Message. 
"Ready?" he said to Fenchurch, who nodded. 
They heaved up Marvin between them. 
They rounded the foot of the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains, and 
there was the Message written in blazing letters along the crest of the 
Mountain. There was a little observation vantage point with a rail 
built along the top of a large rock facing it, from which you could get a 
good view. It had a little pay`telescope for looking at the letters in 
detail, but no one would ever use it because the letters burned with 
the divine brilliance of the heavens and would, if seen through a 
telescope, have severely damaged the retina and optic nerve. 
They gazed at God's Final Message in wonderment, and were 
slowly and ineffably filled with a great sense of peace, and of final and 
complete understanding. 
Fenchurch sighed. "Yes," she said, "that was it." 
They had been staring at it for fully ten minutes before they 
became aware that Marvin, hanging between their shoulders, was in 
difficulties. The robot could no longer lift his head, had not read the 
message. They lifted his head, but he complained that his vision 
circuits had almost gone. 
They found a coin and helped him to the telescope. He complained 
and insulted them, but they helped him look at each individual letter 
in turn, The first letter was a "w", the second an "e". Then there was a 
gap. An "a" followed, then a "p", an "o" and an "l". 
Marvin paused for a rest. 
After a few moments they resumed and let him see the "o", the "g", 
the "i", the "s" and the "e". 
The next two words were "for" and "the". The last one was a long 
one, and Marvin needed another rest before he could tackle it. 
It started with an "i", then "n" then a "c". Next came an "o" and an 
"n", followed by a "v", an "e", another "n" and an "i". 
After a final pause, Marvin gathered his strength for the last stretch. 
He read the "e", the "n", the "c" and at last the final "e", and 
staggered back into their arms. 
"I think," he murmured at last, from deep within his corroding 
rattling thorax, "I feel good about it." 
The lights went out in his eyes for absolutely the very last time ever. 
Luckily, there was a stall nearby where you could rent scooters 
from guys with green wings. 
Epilogue:$
One of the greatest benefactors of all lifekind was a man who 
couldn't keep his mind on the job in hand. 
Brilliant? 
Certainly. 
One of the foremost genetic engineers of his or any other 
generation, including a number he had designed himself? 
Without a doubt. 
The problem was that he was far too interested in things which he 
shouldn't be interested in, at least, as people would tell him, not now. 
He was also, partly because of this, of a rather irritable disposition. 
So when his world was threatened by terrible invaders from a 
distant star, who were still a fair way off but travelling fast, he, Blart 
Versenwald III (his name was Blart Versenwald III, which is not strictly 
relevant, but quite interesting because ʹ never mind, that was his 
name and we can talk about why it's interesting later), was sent into 
guarded seclusion by the masters of his race with instructions to 
design a breed of fanatical superwarriors to resist and vanquish the 
feared invaders, do it quickly and, they told him, "Concentrate " 
So he sat by a window and looked out at a summer lawn and 
designed and designed and designed, but inevitably got a little 
distracted by things, and by the time the invaders were practically in 
orbit round them, had come up with a remarkable new breed of 
super`fly that could, unaided, figure out how to fly through the open 
half of a half`open window, and also an off`switch for children. 
Celebrations of these remarkable achievements seemed doomed to 
be shortlived because disaster was imminent as the alien ships were 
landing. But astoundingly, the fearsome invaders who, like most 
warlike races were only on the rampage because they couldn't cope 
with things at home, were stunned by Versenwald's extraordinary 
breakthroughs, joined in the celebrations and were instantly prevailed 
upon to sign a wide`ranging series of trading agreements and set up a 
programme of cultural exchanges. And, in an astonishing reversal of 
normal practice in the conduct of such matters, everybody concerned 
lived happily ever after. 
There was a point to this story, but it has temporarily escaped the 
chronicler's mind. 
DOUGLAS ADAMS 
YOUNG ZAPHOD PLAYS IT 
SAFE 
A large flying craft moved swiftly across the surface of an 
astoundingly beautiful sea. From mid`morning onward it plied back 
and forth in great widening arcs, and at last attracted the attention of 
the local islanders' a peaceful, sea`food`loving people who gathered 
on the beach and squinted up into the blinding sun, trying to see what 
was there. 
Any sophisticated knowledgeable person, who had knocked about, 
seen a few things, would probably have remarked on how much the 
craft looked like a filing cabinet ʹ a large and recently burgled filing 
cabinet lying on its back with its drawers in the air and flying. 
The islanders, whose experience was of a different kind, were 
instead struck by how little it looked like a lobster. 
They chattered excitedly about its total lack of claws, its stiff 
unbending back, and the fact that it seemed to experience the 
greatest difficulty staying on the ground. This last feature seemed 
particularly funny to them. They jumped up and down on the spot a 
lot to demonstrate to the stupid thing that they themselves found 
staying on the ground the easiest thing in the world. 
But soon this entertainment began to pall for them. After all, since 
it was perfectly clear to them that the thing was not a lobster, and 
since their world was blessed with an abundance of things that were 
lobsters (a good half dozen of which were now marching succulently 
up the beach toward them), they saw no reason to waste any more 
time on the thing but decided instead to adjourn immediately for a 
late lobster lunch. 
At that exact moment the craft stopped suddenly in mid`air, then 
upended itself and plunged headlong into the ocean with a great 
crash of spray which sent them shouting into the trees. 
When they reemerged, nervously, a few minutes later, all they 
were able to see was a smoothly scarred circle of water and a few 
gulping bubbles. 
That's odd, they said to each other between mouthfuls of the best 
lobster to be had anywhere in the Western Galaxy, that's the second 
time that's happened in a year. 
The craft which wasn't a lobster dived direct to a depth of two 
hundred feet, and hung there in the heavy blueness, while vast 
masses of water swayed about it. High above, where the water was 
magically clear, a brilliant formation of fish flashed away. Below, 
where the light had difficulty reaching, the color of the water sank to 
a dark and savage. 
Here, at two hundred feet, the sun streamed feebly. A large, silk`
skinned sea`mammal rolled idly by, inspecting the craft with a kind of 
half interest, as if it had half expected to find something of this kind 
around about here, and then it slid on up and away toward the 
rippling light. 
The craft waited for a minute or two, taking readings, and then 
descended another hundred feet. At this depth it was becoming 
seriously dark. After a moment or two the internal lights of the craft 
shut down, an 
in the second or so that passed before the main external beams 
suddenly; stabbed out, the only visible light came from a small hazily 
illuminated pink sign which read The Beeblebrox Salvage and Really 
Wild Stuff Corporation. 
The huge beams switched downward, catching a vast shoal of silver 
fish which swiveled away in silent panic. 
In the dim control room, which extended in a broad bow from the 
craft's blunt prow, four heads were gathered around a computer 
display that was analyzing the very, very faint and intermittent signals 
that emanated from deep on the sea bed. 
"That's it," said the owner of one of the heads finally. 
"Can we be quite sure?" said the owner of another of the heads. 
"One hundred percent positive," replied the owner of the first head. 
"You're one hundred percent positive that the ship which is 
crashed on the bottom of this ocean is the ship which you said you 
were one hundred percent positive could one hundred percent 
positively never crash?" said the owner of the two remaining heads. 
"Hey," he put up two of his hands, "I'm only asking." 
The two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance 
Administration responded to this with a very cold stare, but the man 
with the odd, or rather the even, number of heads missed it. He flung 
himself back on the pilot couch, opened a couple of beers ʹ one for 
himself and the other also for himself ʹ stuck his feet on the console 
and said "Hey, baby" through the ultra`glass at a passing fish. 
"Mr. Beeblebrox..." began the shorter and less reassuring of the 
two officials in a low voice. 
"Yup?" said Zaphod, rapping a suddenly empty can down on some 
of the more sensitive instruments. "You ready to dive; Let's go." 
"Mr. Beeblebrox, let us make one thing perfectly clear..." 
"Yeah let's," said Zaphod. "How about this for a start. Why don't 
you just tell me what's really on this ship." 
"We have told you," said the official. "By`products." 
Zaphod exchanged weary glances with himself. 
"By`products," he said. "By`products of what?" 
"Processes," said the official. 
"What processes?" 
"Processes that are perfectly safe." 
"Santa Zarquana Voostra " exclaimed both of Zaphod's heads in 
chorus. "So safe that you have to build a zarking fortress ship to take 
the byproducts to the nearest black hole and tip them in  Only it 
doesn't get there because the pilot takes a detour ʹ is this right? ʹ to 
pick up some lobster...? OK, so the guy is cool, but... I mean own up, 
this is barking time, this is major lunch, this is stool approaching 
critical mass, this is... this is... total vocabulary failure " 
"Shut up " his right head yelled at his left, "we're flanging " 
He got a good calming grip on the remaining beer can. 
"Listen, guys," he resumed after a moment's peace and 
contemplation. The two officials had said nothing. Conversation at 
this level was not something to which they felt they could aspire. "I 
just want to know," insisted Zaphod, "what you're getting me into 
here." 
He stabbed a finger at the intermittent readings trickling over the 
computer screen. They meant nothing to him but he didn't like the 
look of them at all. They were all squiggly with lots of long numbers 
and things. 
"It's breaking up, is that it?" he shouted. "It's got a hold full of 
epsilonic radiating aorist rods or something that'll fry this whole space 
sector for zillions of years back and it's breaking up. Is that the story? 
Is that what we're going down to find? Am I going to come out of that 
wreck with even more heads?" 
"It cannot possibly be a wreck, Mr. Beeblebrox," insisted the official, 
"the ship is guaranteed to be perfectly safe. It cannot possibly break 
up." 
"Then why are you so keen to go and look at it?" 
"We like to look at things that are perfectly safe." 
"Freeeooow " 
"Mr. Beeblebrox," said the official, patiently, "may I remind you 
that you have a job to do?" 
"Yeah, well, maybe I don't feel so keen on doing it all of a sudden. 
What do you think I am, completely without any moral whatsits, what 
are they called, those moral things?" 
"Scruples?" 
"Scruples, thank you, whatsoever? Well?" 
The two officials waited calmly. They coughed slightly to help pass 
the time. 
Zaphod sighed a "what is the world coming to" sort of sigh to 
absolve himself from all blame, and swung himself around in his seat. 
"Ship?" he called. 
"Yup?" said the ship. 
"Do what I do." 
The ship thought about this for a few milliseconds and then, after 
double checking all the seals on its heavy duty bulkheads, it began 
slowly, inexorably, in the hazy blaze of its lights, to sink to the lowest 
depths. 
Five hundred feet. 
A thousand. 
Two thousand. 
Here, at a pressure of nearly seventy atmospheres, in the chilling 
depths where no light reaches, nature keeps its most heated 
imaginings. Two foo6: long nightmares loomed wildly into the 
bleaching light, yawned, and vanished back into the blackness. 
Two and a half thousand feet. 
At the dim edges of the ship's lights guilty secrets flitted by with 
their eyes on stalks. 
Gradually the topography of the distantly approaching ocean bed 
resolved with greater and greater clarity on the computer displays 
until as last a shape could be made out that was separate and distinct 
from its surroundings. It was like a huge lopsided cylindrical fortress 
that widened sharply halfway along its length to accommodate the 
heavy ultraplating with which the crucial storage holds were clad, and 
which were supposed by its builders to have made this the most 
secure and impregnable spaceship ever built. Before launch the 
material structure of this section had been battered, rammed, blasted 
and subjected to every assault its builders knew it could withstand in 
order to demonstrate that it could withstand them. 
The tense silence in the cockpit tightened perceptibly as it became 
dear that it was this section that had broken rather neatly in two. 
"In fact it's perfectly safe," said one of the officials, "it's built so 
that even if the ship does break up, the storage holds cannot possibly 
be breached." 
Three thousand, eight hundred and twenty`five feet. 
Four Hi`Presh`A Smart Suits moved slowly out of the open 
hatchway of the salvage craft and waded through the barrage of its 
lights toward the monstrous shape that loomed darkly out of the sea 
night. They moved with a sort of clumsy grace, near weightlessness 
though weighed on by a world of water. 
With his right`hand head Zaphod peered up into the black 
immensities above him and for a moment his mind sang with a silent 
roar of horror. He glanced to his left and was relieved to see that his 
other head was busy watching the Brockian Ultra`Cricket broadcasts 
on the helmet vid without concern. Slightly behind him to his left 
walked the two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance 
Administration, slightly in front of him to his right walked the empty 
suit, carrying their implements and testing the way for them. 
They passed the huge rift in the broken backed Starship Billion Year 
Bunker, and played their flashlights up into it. Mangled machinery 
loomed between torn and twisted bulkheads, two feet thick. A family 
of large transparent eels lived in there now and seemed to like it. 
The empty suit preceded them along the length of the ship's 
gigantic murky hull, trying the airlocks. The third one it tested ground 
open uneasily. They crowded inside it and waited for several long 
minutes while the pump mechanisms dealt with the hideous pressure 
that the ocean exerted, and slowly replaced it with an equally hideous 
pressure of air and inert gases. At last the inner door slid open and 
they were admitted to a dark outer holding area of the Starship Billion 
Year Bunker. 
Several more high security Titan`O`Hold doors had to be passed 
through, each of which the officials opened with a selection of quark 
keys. Soon they were so deep within the heavy security fields that the 
UltraCricket broadcasts were beginning to fade, and Zaphod had to 
switch to one of the rock video stations, since there was nowhere that 
they were not able to reach. 
A final doorway slid open, and they emerged into a large sepulchral 
space. Zaphod played his flashlight against the opposite wall and it fell 
full on a wild`eyed screaming face. 
Zaphod screamed a diminished fifth himself, dropped his light and 
sat heavily on the floor, or rather on a body which had been lying 
there undisturbed for around six months and which reacted to being 
sat on by exploding with great violence. Zaphod wondered what to do 
about all this, and after a brief but hectic internal debate decided that 
passing out would be the very thing. 
He came to a few minutes later and pretended not to know who he 
was, where he was or how he had got there, but was nor able to 
convince anybody. He then pretended that his memory suddenly 
retuned with a rush and that the shock caused him to pass out again, 
but he was helped unwillingly to his feet by the empty suit ʹ which he 
was beginning to take a serious dislike to ʹ and forced to come to 
terms with his surroundings: 
They were dimly and fitfully lit and unpleasant in a number of 
respects, the most obvious of which was the colorful arrangement of 
parts of the ship's late lamented Navigation Officer over the floor, 
walls and ceiling, and especially over the lower half of his, Zaphod's, 
suit. The effect of this was so astoundingly nasty that we shall not be 
referring to it again at any point in this narrative ʹ other than to 
record briefly the fact that it caused Zaphod to throw up inside his 
suit, which he therefore removed and swapped, after suitable 
headgear modifications, with the empty one. Unfortunately the 
stench of the fetid air in the ship, followed by the sight of his own suit 
walking around casually draped in rotting intestines was enough to 
make him throw up in the other suit as well, which was a problem 
that he and the suit would simply have to live with. 
There. All done. No more nastiness. 
At least, no more of that particular nastiness. 
The owner of the screaming face had calmed down very slightly 
now and was babbling away incoherently in a large tank of yellow 
liquid`
emergency suspension tank. 
"It was crazy," he babbled, "crazy  I told him we could always try 
the lobster on the way back, but he was crazy. Obsessed  Do you ever 
get like that about lobster? Because I don't. Seems to me it's all 
rubbery and fiddly to eat, and not that much taste, well I mean is 
there? I infinitely prefer scallops, and said so. Oh Zarquon, I said so " 
Zaphod stared at this extraordinary apparition, flailing in its tank. 
The man was attached to all kinds of life`support tubes, and his voice 
was bubbling out of speakers that echoed insanely around the ship, 
returning as haunting echoes from deep and distant corridors. 
"That was where I went wrong," the madman yelled, "I actually 
said that I preferred scallops and he said it was because I hadn't had 
real lobster like they did where his ancestors came from, which was 
here, and he'd prove it. He said it was no problem, he said the lobster 
here was worth a whole journey, let alone the small diversion it 
would take to get here, and he swore he could handle the ship in the 
atmosphere, but it was madness, madness " he screamed, and 
paused with his eyes rolling, as if the word had rung some kind of bell 
in his mind. "The ship went right out of control  I couldn't believe 
what we were doing and just to prove a point about lobster which is 
really so overrated as a food, I'm sorry to go on about lobsters so 
much, I'll try and stop in a minute, but they've been on my mind so 
much for the months I've been in this tank, can you imagine what it's 
like to be stuck in a ship with the same guys for months eating junk 
food when all one guy will talk about is lobster and then spend six 
months floating by yourself in a tank thinking about it. I promise I will 
try and shut up about the lobsters, I really will. Lobsters, lobsters, 
lobsters ʹ enough  I think I'm the only survivor. I'm the only one who 
managed to get to an emergency tank before we went down. I sent 
out the Mayday and then we hit. It's a disaster, isn't it? A total 
disaster, and all because the guy liked lobsters. How much sense am I 
making? It's really hard for me to tell." 
He gazed at them beseechingly, and his mind seemed to sway 
slowly back down to earth like a falling leaf. He blinked and looked at 
them oddly like a monkey peering at a strange fish. He scrabbled 
curiously with his wrinkled up fingers at the glass side of the tank. 
Tiny, thick yellow bubbles loosed themselves from his mouth and 
nose, caught briefly in his swab of hair and strayed on upward. 
"Oh Zarquon, oh heavens," he mumbled pathetically to himself, 
"I've been found. I've been rescued...." 
"Well," said one of the officials, briskly,"you've been found at 
least." He strode over to the main computer bank in the middle of the 
chamber and started checking quickly through the ship's main 
monitor circuits for damage reports. 
"The aorist rod chambers are intact," he said. 
"Holy dingo's dos," snarled Zaphod, "there are aorist rods on 
board... " 
Aorist rods were devices used in a now happily abandoned form of 
energy production. When the hunt for new sources of energy had at 
one point got particularly frantic, one bright young chap suddenly 
spotted that one place which had never used up all its available 
energy ʹ the past. And with the sudden rush of blood to the head that 
such insights tend to induce, he invented a way of mining it that very 
same night, and within a year huge tracts of the past were being 
drained of all their energy and simply wasting away Those who 
claimed that the past should be left unspoiled were accused of 
indulging in an extremely expensive form of sentimentality. The past 
provided a very cheap, plentiful and clean source of energy, there 
could always be a few Natural Past Reserves set up if anyone wanted 
to pay for their upkeep, and as for the claim that draining the past 
impoverished the present, well, maybe it did, slightly, but the effects 
were immeasurable and you really had to keep a sense of proportion. 
It was only when it was realized that the present really was being 
impoverished, and that the reason for it was that those selfish 
plundering wastrel bastards up in the future were doing exactly the 
same thing, that everyone realized that every single aorist rod, and 
the terrible secret of how they were made, would have to be utterly 
and forever destroyed. They claimed it was for the sake of their 
grandparents and grandchildren, but it was of course for the sake of 
their grandparent's grandchildren, and their grandchildren's 
grandparents. 
The official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration 
gave a dismissive shrug. 
"They're perfectly safe," he said. He glanced up at Zaphod and 
suddenly said with uncharacteristic frankness,"There's worse than 
that on board. At least," he added, tapping at one of the computer 
screens, "I hope it's on board." 
The other official rounded on him sharply. 
"What the hell do you think you're saying?" he snapped. 
The first shrugged again. He said, "It doesn't matter. He can say 
what he likes. No one would believe him. It's why we chose to use 
him rather than do anything official, isn't it? The more wild the story 
he tells, the more it'll sound like he's some hippy adventurer making it 
up. He can even say that we said this and it'll make him sound like a 
paranoid." He smile' pleasantly at Zaphod who was seething in his 
nasty suit. "You may accompany us," he told him, "if you wish." 
"You see?" said the official, examining the ultra`titanium outer 
seals of the aorist rod hold. "Perfectly secure, perfectly safe." 
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing chemical 
weapons so powerful that a teaspoonful could fatally infect an entire 
planet. 
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing zeta`activq. 
compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could blow up a whole 
planet. 
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing theta`active 
compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could irradiate a whole 
planet. 
"I'm glad I'm not a planet," muttered Zaphod. 
"You'd have nothing to fear," assured the official from the Safety 
and Civil Reassurance Administration, "planets are very safe. 
Provided," he added ʹ and paused. They were approaching the hold 
nearest to the point where the back of the Starship Billion Year 
Bunker was broken. The corridor here was twisted and deformed, and 
the floor was damp and sticky in patches. 
"Ho hum," he said,"ho very much hum." 
"What's in this hold?" demanded Zaphod. 
"By`products," said the official, clamming up again. 
"By`products...," insisted Zaphod, quietly, "of what?" 
Neither official answered. Instead, they examined the hold door 
very carefully and saw that its seals were twisted apart by the forces 
that had deformed the whole corridor. One of them touched the door 
lightly. It swung open to his touch. There was darkness inside, with 
just a couple of dim yellow lights deep within it. 
"Of what?" hissed Zaphod. 
The leading official turned to the other. 
"There's an escape capsule," he said, "that the crew were to use to 
abandon ship before jettisoning it into the black hole," he said. "I 
think it would be good to know that it's still there." The other official 
nodded and left without a word. 
The first official quietly beckoned Zaphod in. The large dim yellow 
lights glowed about twenty feet from them. 
"The reason," he said, quietly, "why everything else in this ship is, I 
maintain, safe, is that no one is really crazy enough to use them. No 
one. At least no one that crazy would ever get near them. Anyone 
that mad or dangerous rings very deep alarm bells. People may be 
stupid but they're not that stupid." 
"By`products," hissed Zaphod again, he had to hiss in order that his 
voice shouldn't be heard to tremble, "of what." 
"Er, Designer People." 
"What? " 
"The Sirius Cybernetics Corporation was awarded a huge research 
grant to design and produce synthetic personalities to order. The 
results were uniformly disastrous. All the 'people' and 'personalities' 
turned out to be amalgams of characteristics that simply could not co`
exist in naturally occurring life forms. Most of them were just poor 
pathetic misfits, but some were deeply, deeply dangerous. Dangerous 
because they didn't ring alarm bells in other people. They could walk 
through situations the way that ghosts walk through walls, because 
no one spotted the danger. 
"The most dangerous of all were three identical ones ʹ they were 
put in this hold, to be blasted, with this ship, right out of this universe. 
They are not evil, in fact they are rather simple and charming. But 
they are the most dangerous creatures that ever lived because there 
is nothing they will not do if allowed, and nothing they will not be 
allowed to do...." 
Zaphod looked at the dim yellow lights, the two dim yellow lights. 
As his eyes became accustomed to the light he saw that the two lights 
framed a third space where something was broken. Wet sticky 
patches gleamed dully on the floor. 
Zaphod and the official walked cautiously toward the lights. At that 
moment, four words came crashing into the helmet headsets from 
the other official. 
"The capsule is gone," he said tersely. 
"Trace it," snapped Zaphod's companion. "Find exactly where it has 
gone. We must know where it has gone " 
Zaphod slid aside a large ground`glass door. Beyond it lay a tank 
full of thick yellow liquid, and floating in it was a man, a kindly looking 
man with lots of pleasant laugh lines around his face. He seemed to 
be floating quite contentedly and smiling to himself. 
Another terse message suddenly came through his helmet headset. 
The planet toward which the escape capsule had headed had already 
been identified. It was in Galactic Sector ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha. 
The kindly looking man in the tank seemed to be babbling gently to 
himself, just as the co`pilot had been in his tank. Little yellow bubbles 
beaded on the man's lips. Zaphod found a small speaker by the tank 
and turned it on. He heard the man babbling gently about a shining 
city on a hill. 
He also heard the official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance 
Administration issue instructions that the planet in ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha 
must be made "perfectly safe." 

